186

(ii) a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of
banking (including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative
land development bank); or
(iii) a Post Office as defined in section 2(k) of the Post Office Act, 2023.
(2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed for a tax year as follows:—

43 of 2023.
5

(a) in case of assessee mentioned in sub-section 1(a) or (c), the whole of
the interest up to a maximum amount of ten thousand rupees on deposits in a
savings account, excluding time deposits;
(b) in case of assessee mentioned in sub-section (1)(b), the whole of the
interest up to a maximum amount of fifty thousand rupess on deposits in a
savings account, including time deposits.
(3) Where the income referred to in this section is derived from any deposit in
a savings account held by, or on behalf of, a firm, an association of persons or a
body of individuals, no deduction shall be allowed under this section in respect of
such income in computing the total income of any partner of the firm or any member
of the association or any individual of the body.

10

15

(4) In this section, “time deposits” means the deposits repayable on expiry of
fixed periods.
E.—Other deductions
Deduction in
case of a person
with disability.

154. (1) An individual, being resident in India, who is certified by a medical
authority, at any time during the tax year, as a person with disability or person with
severe disability, shall be allowed a deduction of seventy-five thousand rupees or
one lakh and twenty-five thousand rupees, respectively, while computing his total
income.

20

(2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed only if all of the
following conditions are fulfilled:––

25

(a) the individual furnishes a copy of the certificate issued by the medical
authority;
(b) if the certificate specifies that the disability needs reassessment of its
extent after a period stipulated in it, the deduction shall not be allowed for any
tax year succeeding the tax year in which the certificate expires, unless a new
disability certificate is obtained and submitted; and
(c) the certificate referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of this sub-section shall be
furnished in the form and manner, as prescribed, along with the return of income
under section 263 for the tax year in which the deduction is claimed.

30

]

35

(3) For the purposes of this section, “disability”, “medical authority”, “person
with disability” or “person with severe disability” shall have the same meanings as
provided in section 127.
CHAPTER IX
REBATES AND RELIEFS

40

A.—Rebates and reliefs
Rebate to be
allowed in
computing
income-tax.

155. (1) In computing income-tax on the total income of an assessee with which
he is chargeable for any tax year, there shall be allowed from income-tax (as computed
before allowing the deductions under this Chapter), subject to the provisions of
section 156, the deductions specified therein.
(2) The deduction under section 156, shall not, in any case, exceed
income-tax (as computed before allowing the deductions under this Chapter) on the
total income of the assessee with which he is chargeable for any tax year.

45

187

5

156. (1) A resident individual assessee shall be entitled to a deduction of 100%
of income-tax payable or twelve thousand five hundred rupees, whichever is less,
from the income-tax (computed before allowing the deduction under this section)
chargeable on the total income for any tax year if the total income does not exceed
five lakh rupees.

Rebate of
income-tax in
case of certain
individuals.

(2) Where the total income of a resident individual assessee for any tax year is
chargeable to tax under section 202(1), then from income-tax (computed before
allowing the deduction under this section) following deductions shall be allowed, if—
10

(a) the income does not exceed twelve lakh rupees, 100% of the
income-tax payable or sixty thousand rupees, whichever is less;
(b) the income exceeds twelve lakh rupees, the income-tax payable on the
total income, reduced by total income which is in excess of twelve lakh rupees.
(3) The deduction under sub-section (2), shall not exceed income-tax payable as
per the rates provided in section 202(1).

15

157. (1) Where the total income of an assessee is assessed at a rate higher than the
rate at which it would otherwise have been assessed, due to the following receipts,—
(a) a sum in the nature of arrear or advance salary; or

Relief when
salary, etc., is
paid in arrears or
in advance.

(b) salary for more than twelve months in any one tax year; or
20

(c) a payment in the nature of “profits in lieu of salary” under
section 18(1); or
(d) arrears of “family pension” as defined in section 93(1)(d),
the Assessing Officer shall on an application made to him by the assessee in this
behalf, grant such relief, as prescribed.

25

(2) No relief shall be granted on any income on which deduction has been
claimed by the assessee in section 19(1)(Table: Sl. No. 12) for any amount
mentioned therein, for such, or any other, tax year.
158. (1) The income accrued in a specified account, maintained in a notified
country by a specified person, shall be taxed in a tax year, as prescribed.
(2) In this section,—

30

(a) “notified country” means a country as notified by the Central Government;

Relief from
taxation in
income from
retirement
benefit account
maintained in a
notified country.

(b) “specified account” means an account maintained in a notified country
by the specified person for his retirement benefits, which is taxed by that notified
country at the time of withdrawal or redemption and, not on accrual basis;
35

(c) “specified person” means a person resident in India having opened a
specified account in a notified country while being non-resident in India and
resident in that country.
B.—Double taxation relief
159. (1) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the
Government of—

40

(a) any other country;or
(b) any specified territory,
for the purposes mentioned in sub-section (3), and may, by notification, make such
provisions as necessary for implementing the agreement.

Agreement with
foreign countries
or specified
territories and
adoption by
Central
Government of
agreement
between
specified
associations for
double taxation
relief.

188

(2) Any specified association in India may enter into an agreement with any
specified association in the specified territory for the purposes mentioned in
sub-section (3) and the Central Government may, by notification, make such
provisions as may be necessary for adopting and implementing such agreement.
(3) The agreement mentioned in sub-section (1) or (2) may be entered for—

5

(a) the granting of relief in respect of—
(i) income on which income-tax has been paid both under this Act
and income-tax in that country or specified territory, as the case may
be; or
(ii) income-tax chargeable under this Act and under the
corresponding law in force in that country or specified territory, as the
case may be, to promote mutual economic relations, trade and
investment; or
(b) the avoidance of double taxation of income under this Act and under
the corresponding law in force in that country or specified territory, as the case
may be, without creating opportunities for non-taxation or reduced taxation
through tax evasion or avoidance (including through treaty-shopping
arrangements aimed at obtaining reliefs provided in the said agreement for the
indirect benefit to residents of any other country or territory);
(c) exchange of information for––

10

15

20

(i) the prevention of evasion or avoidance of income-tax
chargeable under this Act or under the corresponding law in force in that
country or specified territory, as the case may be; or
(ii) investigation of cases of such evasion or avoidance; or
(d) recovery of income-tax under this Act and under the corresponding
law in force in that country or specified territory, as the case may be.

25

(4) Where,––
(a) the Central Government has entered into an agreement with the
Government of any country or specified territory, as the case may be, under
sub-section (1); or

30

(b) a specified association in India has entered into an agreement with a
specified association of any specified territory under sub-section (2) and such
agreement has been notified under that sub-section,
for granting relief of tax, or avoidance of double taxation, then, in relation to the
assessee to whom such agreement applies, the provisions of this Act shall apply to
the extent they are more beneficial to that assessee.

35

(5) The charge of tax,––
(a) in respect of a foreign company at a rate higher than the rate at which
a domestic company is chargeable; or
(b) in respect of a company incorporated in the specified territory at a
rate higher than the rate at which a domestic company is chargeable,

40

shall not be regarded as less favourable charge or levy of tax in respect of such
foreign company or such company incorporated in the specified territory, as the case
may be.
(6) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (4), the provisions of
Chapter XI shall apply to the assessee, even if such provisions are not beneficial to
him.

45

189

(7) Where, any––

5

10

15

(a) term used in an agreement entered into under sub-section (1) or (2),
is defined under the said agreement, the said term shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in that agreement and where the term is not defined in that
agreement, but defined in this Act, it shall have the same meaning as assigned
to it in this Act and the explanation, if any, given to it by the Central
Government, and shall be deemed to have effect from the date on which that
agreement came into force; or
(b) term is used but not defined in this Act or in the agreement referred to in
sub-section (1) or (2), it shall, unless the context otherwise requires, and is not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the said agreement, have the same
meaning as assigned to it in the notification issued by the Central Government in
this behalf, and the meaning assigned to such term shall be deemed to have effect
from the date on which that agreement came into force; or
(c) term is used in any agreement entered into under sub-section (1) or
(2), and not defined under the said agreement or this Act, or in any notification
issued under clause (b), then, unless the context otherwise requires, it shall
have the same meaning as assigned to it––
(i) in any Act of the Central Government related to taxes; and

20

(ii) in any other case, in any other law of the Central Government,
and shall be deemed to have effect from the date on which the said agreement came
into force.
(8) An assessee, not being a resident, shall be entitled to claim any relief under
an agreement mentioned in sub-section (1) or (2), only when––

25

(a) a certificate of his being a resident in any country or specified
territory, is obtained by him from the Government of that country or
Government of that specified territory, as the case may be, and
(b) he provides such other documents and information, as prescribed.
(9) In this section,––

30

(a) “specified associations” means any institution, association or body,
whether incorporated or not––
(A) functioning under any law for the time being in force in India
or the laws of the specified territory; and
(B) which may be notified as such by the Central Government; and

35

40

(b) “specified territory” means any area outside India which may be
notified as such by the Central Government.
160. (1) If any person who is resident in India in any tax year proves that, in respect
of his income which accrued or arose during that tax year outside India (and which is
not deemed to accrue or arise in India), he has paid in any country with which there is
no agreement under section 159 for the relief or avoidance of double taxation,
income-tax, by deduction or otherwise, under the law in force in that country, he shall
be entitled to the deduction from the Indian income-tax payable by him of a sum
calculated on such doubly taxed income,––

Countries with
which no
agreement
exists.

190

(a) at the Indian rate of tax or the rate of tax of the said country, whichever
is the lower; or
(b) at the Indian rate of tax, if both the rates are equal.
(2) If any non-resident person is assessed on his share in the income of a
registered firm assessed as resident in India in any tax year and such share includes
any income accruing or arising outside India during that tax year (and which is not
deemed to accrue or arise in India) in a country with which there is no agreement
under section 159 for the relief or avoidance of double taxation and he proves that
he has paid income-tax by deduction or otherwise under the law in force in that
country in respect of the income so included he shall be entitled to a deduction from
the Indian income-tax payable by him of a sum calculated on such doubly taxed
income so included,––

5

10

(a) at the Indian rate of tax or the rate of tax of the said country, whichever
is the lower; or
(b) at the Indian rate of tax, if both the rates are equal.

15

(3) In this section,—
(a) “income-tax” in relation to any country includes any excess profits tax
or business profits tax charged on the profits by the Government of any part of
that country or a local authority in that country;
(b) “Indian income-tax” means income-tax charged as per this Act;

20

(c) “Indian rate of tax” means the rate determined by dividing Indian
income-tax after deduction of any relief due under the provisions of this Act but
before deduction of any relief due under this section, by the total income; and
(d) “rate of tax of the said country” means income-tax and super-tax
actually paid in the said country as per the corresponding laws in force in the
said country after deduction of all relief due, but before deduction of any relief
due in the said country in respect of double taxation, divided by the whole
amount of the income as assessed in the said country.

25

CHAPTER X
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO AVOIDANCE OF TAX
Computation of
income from
international
transaction and
specified
domestic
transaction
having regard to
arm’s length
price.

30

161. (1) Any income arising from an international transaction or a specified
domestic transaction shall be determined having regard to the arm’s length price.
(2) Any allowance for any expense or interest arising from an international
transaction or a specified domestic transaction shall also be determined having regard to
the arm’s length price.

35

(3) If in an international transaction or specified domestic transaction, two or more
associated enterprises enter into a mutual agreement or arrangement for––
(a) allocation or apportionment of any cost or expense incurred or to be
incurred in connection with a benefit, service or facility provided or to be provided
to any one or more of such enterprises; or
(b) any contribution to any cost or expense incurred or to be incurred in
connection with a benefit, service or facility provided or to be provided to any one
or more of such enterprises,

40

