36
.

(c) the income so divided shall be included separately in the total
income of the husband and the wife, and the remaining provisions of
this Act shall apply accordingly; and
(d) where either the husband or the wife, has any income under the
head “Salaries”, that income shall be included in the total income of the
spouse who has actually earned it.

5

CHAPTER III
INCOMES WHICH DO NOT FORM PART OF TOTAL INCOME
A.—Incomes not to be included in total income
Incomes not
included in total
income.

11. (1) In computing the total income of any person for a tax year under
this Act, any income enumerated in Schedules II, III, IV, V, and VI shall not
be included, subject to fulfilment of conditions specified therein.
(2) Wherever the conditions referred to in the Schedules referred in
sub-section (1) are not satisfied in any tax year in respect of any income
enumerated in the said Schedules, such income shall be charged to tax under
this Act for that tax year.

10

15

(3) The persons enumerated in Schedule VII shall, subject to fulfilment
of the conditions specified therein, not be chargeable to tax under this Act for
a tax year.
(4) Wherever the conditions referred to in Schedule VII are not satisfied
in respect of the persons enumerated in the said Schedule, the income of such
person shall be charged to tax under the provisions of this Act.

20

(5) The Central Government may make rules or issue notifications for the
purposes of this section as specified in the Schedules II, III, IV, V, VI and VII.
B.—Incomes not to be included in total income of political parties and
electoral trusts
Incomes not
included in total
income of
political parties
and electoral
trusts.

12. (1) In computing the total income of any political party or an
electoral trust for a tax year under this Act, any income enumerated in
Schedule VIII shall not be included, subject to fulfilment of conditions
specified therein.

25

30

(2) Wherever the conditions referred to in Schedule VIII are not
satisfied in any tax year in respect of any income enumerated in the said
Schedule, such income shall be charged to tax under this Act for that tax year.
(3) The Central Government may make rules or issue notifications for
the purposes of this section as specified in the Schedule VIII.

35

CHAPTER IV
COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME
A.—Heads of income
Heads of income.

13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all incomes shall, for the
purposes of charge of income-tax and computation of total income, be
classified under the following heads of income:—

40

(a) Salaries;
(b) Income from house property;
(c) Profits and gains of business or profession;
(d) Capital gains; and
(e) Income from other sources.

45

37
14. (1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in this Act, for the
purposes of computing the total income under this Chapter, no deduction shall be
allowed in respect of expenditure incurred by the assessee in relation to income
which does not form part of the total income.
5

(2) Where the Assessing Officer, having regard to the accounts of the
assessee, is not satisfied with—

Income not
forming part of
total income
and
expenditure in
relation to such
income.

(a) the correctness of the claim of expenditure incurred by the
assessee; or
10

(b) the claim made by the assessee that no expenditure has been
incurred,
in relation to income which does not form part of the total income under this Act,
he shall determine such amount of expenditure in accordance with any method,
as prescribed.

15

(3) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the
provisions of this section shall apply in a case where any expenditure has been
incurred during any tax year in relation to income which does not form part of the
total income under this Act, but such income has not accrued or arisen or has not
been received during that tax year.
B.—Salaries

20

15. (1) The following income shall be chargeable to income-tax under the
head “Salaries”:—

Salaries.

(a) any salary due from an employer to an assessee in the tax year,
whether paid or not;
25

(b) any salary paid or allowed to him in the tax year by or on behalf of
an employer though not due or before it became due to him;
(c) any arrears of salary paid or allowed to him in the tax year by or
on behalf of an employer, if not charged to income-tax for any earlier tax
year.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), employer includes former employer.

30

35

(3) If any salary paid in advance is included in the total income of any person
for any tax year, it shall not be included again in the total income of such person
when the salary becomes due.
(4) Any salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever name
called, due to, or received by, a partner of a firm from the firm shall not be
regarded as salary for the purposes of this section.
16. For the purposes of this Part, “salary” includes—
(a) wages;
(b) any annuity or pension;
(c) any gratuity;

40

(d) any fees or commission;
(e) perquisites;
(f) profits in lieu of, or in addition to, any salary or wages;
(g) any advance of salary;

45

(h) any payment received by an employee in respect of any period of
leave not availed of by him;

Income from
salary.

38
(i) the annual accretion to the balance at the credit of an employee
participating in a recognised provident fund, to the extent to which it is
chargeable to tax as per paragraph 6 of Part A of Schedule XI;
(j) the aggregate of all sums that are comprised in the transferred
balance as referred to in paragraph 11(2) of Part A of Schedule XI of an
employee participating in a recognised provident fund, to the extent to
which it is chargeable to tax under sub-paragraphs (4) and (5) thereof;
(k) the contribution made by the Central Government or any other
employer in any tax year, to the account of an employee under a pension
scheme referred to in section 124; and

5

10

(l) the contribution made by the Central Government in any tax year,
to the Agniveer Corpus Fund account of an individual enrolled in the
Agnipath Scheme referred to in section 125.
Perquisite.

17. (1) For the purposes of this Part, “perquisite” includes—
(a) the value of rent-free accommodation provided to the assessee by
his employer computed in such manner, as prescribed;

15

(b) the value of any accommodation provided to the assessee by his
employer at a concessional rate which is in excess of rent recoverable from, or
payable by, the assessee, computed in such manner, as prescribed;
(c) the value of any benefit or amenity granted or provided free of cost
or at concessional rate in the following cases:—

20

(i) by a company to an employee, who is a director thereof or
who has a substantial interest in the company;
(ii) by any employer (including a company) to an employee
whose income under the head “Salaries” by way of monetary payment
(from one or more employers) exceeds such amount as prescribed;

25

(d) the value of any specified security or sweat equity shares allotted
or transferred, directly or indirectly, by the current employer, or former
employer, free of cost or at concessional rate to the assessee;
(e) the value of any other benefit or amenity, as prescribed;

30

(f) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any obligation which,
but for such payment, would have been payable by the assessee;
(g) any sum payable by the employer to effect an assurance on the life
of the assessee or to effect a contract for an annuity, whether directly or
through a fund, other than––

35

(i) a recognised provident fund; or
(ii) an approved superannuation fund; or
(iii) a Deposit-linked Insurance Fund established under––
(A) section 3G of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948; or

40

(B) section 6C of the Employees’ Provident Funds and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952;
(h) aggregate amount of any contribution, in excess of seven lakh and
fifty thousand rupees in a tax year, made to the account of the assessee by
the employer—
(i) in a recognised provident fund;
(ii) in the scheme referred to in section 124(1); and
(iii) in an approved superannuation fund;

46 of 1948.

19 of 1952.

45

39

5

(i) the annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any other
amount of similar nature during the tax year to the balance at the credit of
the fund or scheme referred to in clause (h), computed in such manner, as
prescribed (to the extent it relates to the contribution referred to in the said
clause in any tax year).
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to––
(a) the value of any medical treatment provided to an employee or any
member of his family in any hospital maintained by the employer;

10

(b) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any expenditure
actually incurred by the employee on his medical treatment or treatment of
any member of his family—
(i) in any hospital maintained by the Government, or any local
authority, or any other hospital approved by the Government for the
purposes of medical treatment of its employees;

15

20

(ii) in respect of the prescribed diseases or ailments, in any
hospital approved by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner having regard to such guidelines as specified;
(c) any portion of the premium paid by an employer in relation to an
employee, to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the health of such
employee under any scheme approved, for the purposes of section 30(c),
by the––
(i) Central Government; or

41 of 1999.

25

(ii) Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
established under section 3(1) of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999;
(d) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any premium paid by
the employee to effect or to keep in force an insurance on his health or the
health of any member of his family under any scheme, approved for the
purposes of section 126, by the—

30

(i) Central Government; or
(ii) Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
established under section 3(1) of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999;

41 of 1999.

35

(e) any expenditure incurred by the employer for the use of any vehicle
for journey by the assessee from his residence to his office or other place of
work, or from such office or place to his residence;
(f) any expenditure incurred by the employer, or any sum paid by
the employer in respect of any expenditure actually incurred by the
employee, on—

40

(i) medical treatment of the employee or any family member of
such employee outside India;
(ii) travel and stay abroad for the employee or any member of
the family of such employee for medical treatment;

45

(iii) travel and stay abroad of one attendant who accompanies
the patient in connection with such treatment.

40
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2)(f),—
(a) the expenditure on medical treatment and stay abroad shall be
excluded from the perquisite only to the extent permitted by the Reserve
Bank of India; and
(b) the expenditure on travel shall be excluded from perquisite only in
the case of an employee whose gross total income, as computed before
including therein the said expenditure, does not exceed such amount as
prescribed.

5

(4) In this section,—
(a) “fair market value” means the value determined in accordance with
the method, as prescribed;

10

(b) “family”, in relation to an individual, shall have the meaning
assigned to it in Schedule III (Note 2);
(c) “gross total income” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 122(10);

15

(d) “hospital” includes a dispensary or a clinic or a nursing home;
(e) “option” means a right but not an obligation, granted to an
employee to apply for the specified security or sweat equity shares at a
predetermined price;
(f) “specified security” means the securities as defined in section 2(h)
of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 and, where employees’
stock option has been granted under any plan or scheme, includes the
securities offered under such plan or scheme;
(g) “sweat equity shares” means equity shares issued by a company to
its employees or directors at a discount or for consideration other than cash
for providing know-how or making available rights in the nature of
intellectual property rights or value additions, by whatever name called;
(h) the value of any specified security or sweat equity shares shall be
the fair market value of the specified security or sweat equity shares, on the
date on which the option is exercised by the assessee, as reduced by the
amount actually paid by, or recovered from, the assessee in respect of such
security or shares.
Profits in lieu
of salary.

20
42 of 1956.

25

30

18. (1) For the purposes of this Part, “profits in lieu of salary” includes,—
(a) any amount of any compensation due to or received by an assessee
from his employer or former employer at or in connection with the—

35

(i) termination of his employment; or
(ii) modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto;
(b) any amount due to or received, whether in lump-sum or otherwise,
by any assessee from any person—
(i) before his joining any employment with that person; or

40

(ii) after cessation of his employment with that person;
(c) any payment due to or received by an assessee—
(i) from an employer or a former employer; or
(ii) from a provident or other fund, to the extent to which it does
not consist of contributions by the assessee or interest on such 45
contributions; or

41
(iii) any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy as defined in Schedule II
(Note 1), including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy.
(2) The payment referred in sub-section (1)(c) shall not include any payment
referred to in––
5

(a) Schedule II (Table: Sl. No. 3);
(b) Schedule II (Table: Sl. No. 4);
(c) Schedule II (Table: Sl. No. 8); and
(d) Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 11).

10

19. (1) The income chargeable under the head “Salaries” shall be computed
after making the deductions of the nature as mentioned in column B of the
following Table, to the extent as mentioned in column C of the said Table:—
Table

15

20

Sl. No.

Nature of sum

Amount of deduction

A

B

C

1.

Sum paid by the assessee as a
tax on employment as per article
276(2) of the Constitution,
leviable by or under any law.

2.

Standard deduction.

3.

Death-cum-retirement gratuity
received as referred to in
sub-section (2)(g).

Entire amount.

4.

Payment of retiring gratuity
received under the Pension Code
or Regulations applicable to the
members of the defence services.

Entire amount.

5.

Gratuity received under the
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
(39 of 1972).

6.

Any other gratuity received by
an employee—

35

40

(i) on his retirement; or
(ii) on his becoming
incapacitated
before such
retirement; or

45

(a) ₹ 75,000 or the salary,
whichever is less, where
income-tax is computed under
section 202(1);
(b) ₹ 50,000 or the salary,
whichever is less, in any other
case.

25

30

Entire amount.

(iii) on termination of his
employment.

Amount
received,
as
restricted to the amount
calculated as per the provisions
of section 4(2) and (3) of that
Act.
Amount being minimum
of—
(a) actual gratuity received;
(b) amount specified by the
Central
Government,
by
notification, having regard to
the limit applicable in this
behalf to the employees of the
Central Government; and

Deductions
from salaries.

42
A

B

C
(c) half month’s salary for
each completed year of
service,
calculated
as
under:—
1
Amount =
(A x B)
2
where,—
A = average salary for
ten months immediately
preceding the month when
event occurs;

5

10

B = number of such
completed years.
7.

Payment in commutation of
pension received—

Entire amount.

15

(a) under the Civil Pensions
(Commutation) Rules of the
Central Government; or
(b) under any similar scheme
applicable to––

20

(i) the members of the civil
services of the Union or
holders of posts connected
with defence or of civil posts
under the Union, [such
members or holders not
covered under (a)];

25

(ii) the members of the allIndia services;

30

(iii) the members of the
defence services;
(iv) the members of the civil
services of a State, or the
holders of civil posts under a
State; or

35

(v) the employees of a local
authority or a corporation
established by a Central Act or
State Act or Provincial Act.
8.

Payment in commutation of
pension is received under any
scheme from any other employer.

40

(a) If the employee has
received gratuity, the commuted
value of one-third of the pension,
which he is normally entitled to
receive;
(b) in any other case, the
commuted value of one-half of
such pension;

45

43
A

B

C
(c) such commuted value
being determined having
regard to the age of the
recipient, the state of his
health, the rate of interest and
officially recognised tables of
mortality.

5

9.

Payment in commutation of
pension received from a fund as
specified in Schedule VII
(Table: Sl. No. 3).

Entire amount.

10.

Compensation received by a
workman at the time of his
retrenchment—

Minimum of—

10

15

(a) under the Industrial
Disputes
Act,
1947
(14 of 1947); or
(b) under any other Act or
rules, orders or notifications
issued thereunder; or

20

(c) under any standing
orders; or
(d) under
contract of
otherwise.

25

11.
30

any award,
service or

Compensation received by a
workman in accordance with any
scheme which the Central
Government may approve in this
behalf, having regard to––

(a)
received;

compensation

(b) amount calculated as
per provisions of section
25F(b) of the Industrial
Disputes
Act,
1947
(14 of 1947);
(c) such amount, not
being less than ₹ 50,000 as
notified by the Central
Government.

Compensation received.

(a) the need for extending
special protection to the
workmen in the undertaking to
which such scheme applies; and

35

(b) other relevant circumstances.
12.

40

13.
45

50

Amount received or receivable
on voluntary retirement or
termination of service under a
scheme or schemes of voluntary
retirement, by an employee as
referred to in sub-section (2)(h).
Payment received by an
employee
of
the
Central
Government or a State Government
as the cash equivalent of the leave
salary in respect of the period of
earned leave at his credit at the time
of his retirement whether on
superannuation or otherwise.

Minimum of—
(a) compensation received;
and
(b) ₹ 5,00,000.
Entire amount.

44
A

B

14.

Payment of the nature referred
against serial number 13 received
by an employee who is not a
Central Government or State
Government employee.

C
Amount
of —

being

minimum

(a) the cash equivalent of
the leave salary in respect of
the period of earned leave at
his credit at the time of his
retirement,
whether
on
superannuation or otherwise
(entitlement of earned leave
shall not exceed thirty days
for every year of actual
service);
(b) amount “A”,

5

10

15

where,—
A =10×B;
B = average monthly
salary for the ten months
immediately preceding his
retirement
whether
on
superannuation or otherwise;
(c) amount as the Central
Government
may,
by
notification, specify in this
behalf having regard to the
limit applicable in this behalf
to the employees of that
Government; and
(d)
actual
received.

.

payment

20

25

30

(2) For the purposes of the Table referred to in sub-section (1),—
(a) in respect of the entries against serial number 6 thereof, if gratuity
or gratuities was or were received from one or more than one employer in
the same tax year (whether or not any gratuity or gratuities was or were
received in any earlier tax year), the aggregate amount of deduction shall
not exceed—

35

A – B,
where,—
A = the limit specified by the Central Government, by
notification; and
B = the aggregate amount of gratuity or gratuities which was or
were received in any one or more earlier tax years and allowed as an
exemption or a deduction (whether whole or part) from the total
income of any such tax year or years;

40

45

45

(b) in respect of the entries against serial numbers 6 and 14 thereof,
“Salary” includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so
provide, but excludes all other allowances and perquisites;
5

(c) in respect of the entries against serial numbers 10 and 11 thereof,
the following amounts shall be deemed to be compensation received at the
time of retrenchment:––
(i) compensation received by a workman at the time of the
closing down of the undertaking in which he is employed;

10

15

(ii) compensation received by a workman, at the time of the
transfer (whether by agreement or by operation of law) of the
ownership or management of the undertaking in which he is employed
from the employer in relation to that undertaking to a new employer,
if—
(A) the service of the workman has been interrupted by
such transfer; or
(B) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the
workman after such transfer are in any way less favourable to
the workman than those applicable to him immediately before
the transfer; or

20

25
14 of 1947.

(C) the new employer is, under the terms of such transfer
or otherwise, legally not liable to pay to the workman, in the
event of his retrenchment, compensation on the basis that his
service has been continuous and has not been interrupted by the
transfer;
(d) in respect of the entries against serial numbers 10 and 11 thereof,
the expressions “employer” and “workman” shall have the same meanings
as respectively assigned to them in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;
(e) the provisions of the entries against serial number 12 thereof shall
be subject to the following conditions:––

30

35

40

45

(i) the applicable schemes of the said companies or authorities
or societies or Universities or the institutes referred to in clauses
(h)(vii)(x) and (j) in column B of the said serial number, governing the
payment of such amount are made as per such guidelines (including,
inter alia, criteria of economic viability) as prescribed;
(ii) where deduction has been allowed to an employee in respect
of the said item for any tax year, no deduction thereunder shall be
allowed to him in relation to any other tax year; and
(iii) where any relief under section 157 has been allowed to an
assessee for any tax year in respect of any amount referred to in the
said item, such amount shall not be allowed as a deduction from the
compensation received or receivable in any tax year;
(f) in respect of the entries against serial number 14 thereof, if any
payment on account of cash equivalent to leave salary is received from one
or more than one employer in the same tax year (whether or not any such
payment or payments was or were received in any earlier tax year), the
aggregate amount of deduction shall not exceed—
A – B,

46

Where,—
A = the limit specified by the Central Government, by
notification; and
B = the aggregate amount of payment or payments which
was received in any one or more earlier tax years and allowed as
an exemption or a deduction (whether whole or part) from total
income of any such tax year or years;

5

(g) the death-cum-retirement gratuity referred to in sub-section (1)
(Table: Sl. No. 3) shall be––
(A) received under the revised pension rules of the Central
Government, or the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 2021; or

10

(B) received under any similar scheme applicable––
(i) to the members of the civil services of the Union or
holders of posts connected with defence or of civil posts under
the Union (such members or holders being persons not governed
by the said rules);

15

(ii) to the members of the All-India services;
(iii) to the members of the civil services of a State or
holders of civil posts under a State; or

20

(iv) to the employees of a local authority;
(h) the schemes of voluntary retirement or termination of service as
referred to in sub-section (1)(Table: Sl. No. 12) shall be for the
employees of––
(i) a public sector company (under a scheme of voluntary
separation); or

25

(ii) any other company; or
(iii) an authority established under a Central Act or State Act or
Provincial Act; or
(iv) a local authority; or

30

(v) a co-operative society; or
(vi) a University established or incorporated by or under a
Central Act or State Act or Provincial Act and an institution declared
to be a University under section 3 of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956; or

35 3 of 1956.

(vii) an Indian Institute of Technology within the meaning of
section 3(g) of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961; or

59 of 1961.

(viii) the Central or any State Government; or
(ix) an institution, having importance throughout India or in any
State or States, as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf; or

40

(x) such institute of management, as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
C.— Income from house property
Income from
house property.

20. (1) The annual value of property consisting of any buildings or lands
appurtenant thereto, owned by the assessee shall be chargeable to income-tax
under the head “Income from house property”.

45

47

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to such portions of the
property, as occupied by the assessee for his business or profession, the profits of
which are chargeable to income-tax.
5

21. (1) For the purposes of section 20, the annual value of any property shall
be deemed to be the higher of the following:—
(a) the sum for which it might reasonably be expected to let from year to
year; or

Determination
of annual
value.

(b) the actual rent received or receivable by the owner, if the property or any
part of it is let.
10

15

(2) In case the property or any part of it is let in normal course and was
vacant for the whole or any part of the tax year, the annual value of such property
shall be computed as per sub-section (1)(b).
(3) The annual value of the property shall be reduced by the taxes (including
service taxes) levied by a local authority in respect of such property, actually paid
during the tax year by the owner, irrespective of when such taxes became payable.
(4) The rent which cannot be realised by the owner shall not be included in
computing the actual rent received or receivable, subject to the rules as may be
made in this behalf.

20

25

(5) In respect of a property or its part held as stock-in-trade and not let
wholly or partly at any time during the tax year, the annual value shall be nil for
two years from the end of the financial year in which completion certificate is
obtained from the competent authority.
(6) The annual value of the property consisting of a house or any part thereof
shall be taken as nil, if the owner occupies it for his own residence or cannot
actually occupy it due to any reason.
(7) The provisions of sub-section (6)––
(a) shall apply only in respect of two of such houses as specified by
the assessee in this behalf;

30

(b) shall not apply, if the house or any part thereof is actually let during
any time of the tax year, or if the owner derives any other benefit from it.
22. (1) The income under the head “Income from house property” shall be
computed after allowing the following deductions:––
(a) 30% of the annual value;

35

(b) where the property has been acquired, constructed, repaired,
renewed or reconstructed with borrowed capital, the amount of any interest
payable on such capital.
(2) In case of property or properties referred to in section 21(6), the
aggregate amount of deduction under sub-section (1)(b) shall not exceed—
(a) two lakh rupees, subject to the following conditions:––

40

45

(i) the property has been acquired or constructed with borrowed
capital and such acquisition or construction is completed within five
years from the end of tax year in which capital was borrowed;
(ii) if capital is borrowed during any period prior to the tax year
in which the property has been acquired or constructed, any interest
payable for the said prior period shall be allowed as a deduction in five
equal instalments for the said tax year and for each of the four
immediately succeeding tax years;
(iii) the assessee furnishes a certificate from the person to whom
interest is payable on such capital; and

Deductions from
income from
house property.

48

(b) thirty thousand rupees in any other case.
(3) The deduction under sub-section (2)(a)(ii) shall be computed after
reducing any amount already allowed as a deduction under any other
provisions of this Act.
(4) The certificate referred to in sub-section (2) shall specify––

5

(a) the amount of interest payable on capital borrowed; and
(b) the interest payable on any new loan, where subsequent to the
capital borrowed, the assessee has taken any such loan for repayment
of whole or any part of such capital.
(5) The aggregate of the amounts of deduction under sub-section (2) in
respect of properties of the nature referred to in section 21(6) shall not exceed
two lakh rupees.

10

(6) Any interest chargeable under this Act which is payable outside
India shall not be allowed as a deduction under this section, if—
(a) tax has not been paid or deducted on such interest under
Chapter XIX-B; and

15

(b) in respect of such interest, there is no agent in India as per
section 306.
Arrears of rent
and unrealised
rent received
subsequently.

23. (1) The amount of arrears of rent received from a tenant or the
unrealised rent realised subsequently from a tenant shall deemed to be the
income from house property in respect of the tax year in which such rent is
received or realised.
(2) The amount deemed to be income from house property under
sub-section (1) shall be included in the total income of the assessee under the
head “Income from house property”, whether the assessee is the owner of the
property or not in that tax year.

20

25

(3) A sum equal to 30% of the arrears of rent or the unrealised rent
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be allowed as deduction.
Property owned
by co-owners.

24. (1) For property co-owned with definite and ascertainable share, the
co-owners shall not be assessed as an association of persons and their income
computed separately as per their respective share under this Chapter shall be
included in their total income.

30

(2) The relief available under section 21(6) shall be provided as if each
co-owner is individually entitled to the said relief.
Interpretation.

25. For the purposes of sections 20 to 24, the “owner” in relation to a
property shall include––

35

(a) an individual who transfers without adequate consideration,
any property to the spouse (except under an agreement to live apart), or
to a minor child (other than a married daughter);
(b) the holder of an impartible estate;

40

(c) a member of a co-operative society, company or other association
of persons to whom a building or part thereof is allotted or leased under a
house building scheme of the society, company or association;
(d) a person who is allowed to take or retain possession of any
building or part thereof in part performance of a contract of the nature
referred to in section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882;
(e) a person who acquires any rights (excluding any rights by way
of a lease from month to month or for a period not exceeding one year)
in or with respect to any building or its part—

45

4 of 1882.

49

(i) by virtue of transfer of such property by way of sale or
exchange or original or extendible lease for a term of not less than
twelve years; or
5

10

(ii) accruing or arising from any transaction (whether by
way of becoming a member of, or acquiring shares in, a
co-operative society, company or other association of persons or
by way of any agreement or any arrangement of whatever nature),
not being a transaction by way of sale, exchange or lease which
has the effect of enabling the enjoyment of such property.
D.— Profits and gains of business or profession
26. (1) The income from any business or profession carried on by
the assessee at any time during the tax year shall be chargeable to
income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
(2) The income under sub-section (1) shall include––

15

(a) the profits and gains of any business or profession
carried on by the assessee at any time during the tax year;
(b) any compensation or other payment, due to, or received,
by any person by whatever named called,––
(i) wholly or substantially managing the affairs —

20

(A) of an Indian company; or
(B) in India, of any other company; or
(ii) holding any agency in India for any part of
business activities of any other person; or
(iii) for any contract relating to business,

25

30

in connection with termination of management, office or agency
or contract, as the case may be, or modification of terms and
conditions relating thereto;
(c) any compensation or payment, due to, or received by,
any person for vesting of the management of any property or
business in the Government, including any corporation owned or
controlled by the Government under any law in force;
(d) income derived by a trade, professional or similar
association from specific services performed for its members;

35

(e) the amount of any profit on sale of input licence, cash
assistance against export, duty drawback or duty remission or any
other export incentive, received or receivable;
(f) the value of any benefit or perquisite arising from
business or the exercise of a profession, whether—
(i) convertible into money or not; or

40

(ii) in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind;

45

(g) an amount being interest, salary, bonus, commission or
remuneration, by whatever name called, which is due to, or
received by, a partner of a firm from such firm to the extent
allowed under Chapter IV-D as a deduction in computing the
income of the firm;
(h) any sum, received or receivable, in cash or in kind––
(i) under an agreement for not carrying out any
activity in relation to any business or profession, not being–

Income under
head “Profits
and gains of
business or
profession”.

50

(A) a consideration received on account of transfer
of the right to manufacture, produce or process any article
or thing or right to carry on any business or profession
which is chargeable under the head “Capital gains”;
(B) any sum received as compensation from the
multilateral fund of the Montreal Protocol on Substances
that Deplete the Ozone layer under the United Nations
Environment Programme, as per the terms of agreement
entered into with the Government of India; or

5

(ii) under an agreement for not sharing any know-how,
patent, copyright, trade-mark, licence, franchise or any other
business or commercial right of similar nature, or information
or technical know-how likely to assist in the manufacture or
processing of goods or provision for services;

10

(i) any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the
sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy;

15

(j) the fair market value of inventory as on the date on which it is
converted into, or treated as, a capital asset determined in the manner, as
prescribed; and
(k) any sum which is received or receivable in cash or kind, when––

20

(i) a capital asset other than land or goodwill or financial
instrument, is demolished, destroyed, discarded or transferred; and
(ii) the whole of the expenditure on it has been allowed as a
deduction under section 46.
(3) Where speculative transactions carried on by an assessee are of such
nature to constitute a business, the business (herein referred to as speculation
business) shall be deemed to be distinct and separate from any other business.
(4) Any income from letting out of a residential house or a part of it by the
owner shall not be included in income under sub-section (1) and shall be
chargeable only under the head “Income from house property”.
Manner of
computing
profits and gains
of business or
profession.
Rent, rates, taxes,
repairs and
insurance.

25

30

27. The income referred to in section 26 shall be computed as per the
provisions of sections 28 to 60, except section 58.
28. (1) The following amounts shall be allowed as deduction in respect of
premises, machinery, plant or furniture, wholly and exclusively, used for the
purposes of the business or profession:––

35

(a) any premium paid in respect of insurance against risk of damage
or destruction thereof;
(b) land revenue, local rates or municipal taxes paid;
(c) rent paid, when the premises are occupied by the assessee as a tenant;
(d) amount paid on account of current repairs, not being capital
expenditure, when the premises are occupied by the assessee otherwise than
as a tenant; and

40

(e) cost of repairs, not being capital expenditure, when the premises
occupied by the premises occupied by the assessee as a tenant.
(2) In case where the premises, building, machinery, plant or furniture is
partly used or not wholly and exclusively used for the purposes of the business
or profession, the deduction allowable under sub-section (1) shall be restricted
to the fair proportionate part thereof as determined by the Assessing Officer,
having regard to the usage for the purposes of the business or profession.

45

51

29. (1) The following sums, when paid by the assessee as an employer, shall
be allowed as deduction in computing income chargeable under section 26:––
(a) any contribution paid to a recognised provident fund or an
approved superannuation fund, subject to––
5

10

15

Deductions
related to
employee
welfare.

(i) the limits as prescribed for recognising the provident fund
or approving the superannuation fund; and
(ii) the conditions, as the Board may specify, for cases where
the contributions are not made annually either as fixed amounts, or
annual contributions fixed on some definite basis by reference to the
income chargeable under the head “Salaries” or the contributions or
to the number of members of the fund;
(b) any contribution paid to a pension scheme referred to in section 124,
for an employee up to 14% of the salary of the employee in the tax year, where
such salary includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so
provide, but excludes all other allowances and perquisites;
(c) any contribution paid to an approved gratuity fund created by the
assessee for the exclusive benefit of his employees under an irrevocable trust;

20

(d) any provision made for the purpose of making contribution
towards approved gratuity fund or for the purpose of payment of any
gratuity that has become payable during the tax year;
(e)(i) the amount of contribution received from an employee by the
assessee to which the provisions of section 2(49)(o) apply, if it is credited
by the assessee to the account of the employee in the relevant fund or funds
by the due date;

25

30

(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (i), “due date” means the date by
which the assessee is required as an employer to credit employee
contribution to the account of an employee in the relevant fund under any
Act, rule, order or notification issued under it or under any standing order,
award, contract of service or otherwise and the provisions of section 37
shall not apply for determining the “due date” under this clause.
(2) (a) For the purposes of sub-section (1)(d), no deduction shall be
allowed for any provision made for the payment of gratuity to the employees on
their retirement or termination for any reason; and

21 of 1860.

35

(b) in case deduction has been allowed for any provision made under
sub-section (1)(d), then no deduction shall be allowed on actual payment made
from such provision.

40

(3) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of any sum paid by the
assessee as an employer towards setting up or formation of, or as contribution
to, any fund, trust, company, association of persons, body of individuals, society
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or other institution for any
purpose, except where such sum is so paid, for the purposes and to the extent
provided by or under sub-section (1)(a) or (b) or (c), or as required by or under
any other law in force.

45

30. The following sums shall be allowed as deduction in computing income
chargeable under section 26, being premium paid:––
(a) by any assessee in respect of insurance against risk of damage or
destruction of stocks or stores used for the purposes of business or profession;

50

(b) by a federal milk co-operative society to effect or to keep in force
an insurance on the life of the cattle owned by a member of a co-operative
society, being a primary society engaged in supplying milk raised by its
members to such federal milk co-operative society;

Deduction on
certain premium.

52

(c) by the assessee, as an employer, through any mode of payment
other than cash, to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the health of
its employees under a scheme framed in this behalf by—
(i) the General Insurance Corporation of India formed under
section 9 of the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation)
Act, 1972 and approved by the Central Government; or

5
57 of 1972.

(ii) any other insurer and approved by the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority established under section 3(1) of the
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999.
Deduction for
bad debt and
provision for bad
and doubtful
debt.

31. (1) The amount mentioned in column C of the Table below, in respect
of any provision for bad and doubtful debts made by the assessee specified in
column B thereof, shall be allowed as a deduction in computation of income
chargeable under section 26.

41 of 1999.
10

Table
Sl
No.

Specified assessee

Amount of deduction

A

B

C

1.

(a) A scheduled bank, other than a bank
incorporated by or under the laws of a
country outside India; or

(a) not more than
8.5% of the total income
of the tax year computed
before making any
deduction under this
clause and Chapter VIII,
and an additional amount
up to 10% of the
aggregate
average
advances made by rural
branches computed in
the
manner
as
prescribed;

(b) a non-scheduled bank; or
(c) a co-operative bank, other than—
(i) a primary agricultural credit
society; or
(ii)
a
primary
co-operative
agricultural and rural development bank.

(b) for an assessee
mentioned in clauses (a)
and (b) of column B, at
its option, an additional
amount in excess of
clause (a) of this column
but not more than the
income from redemption
of securities as per a
scheme framed by the
Central
Government,
when such income has
been disclosed in the
return of income under
the head “Profits and
gains of business or
profession”.
2.

(a) A bank incorporated by or under the
laws of a country outside India; or
(b) a public financial institution or a
State Financial Corporation or a State
Industrial Investment Corporation; or
(c) a non-banking financial company.

Not more than 5% of
the total income of a tax
year computed before
making any deduction
under this clause and
Chapter VIII.

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

53

(2) Any amount of bad debt, or part of it, in the tax year in which such
amount is written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of the assessee, shall be
allowed as deduction in computation of income chargeable under section 26,
subject to the following conditions:––
5

10

(a) it has been taken into account in computing the income of the
assessee of the tax year in which it is written off, or any earlier tax year, or
represents the money lent in the ordinary course of the business of banking
or money lending which is carried on by the assessee;
(b) if the amount ultimately recovered on any such debt or part of
debt is less than the difference between the debt or part and the amount so
deducted, the deficiency shall be deductible in the tax year in which the
ultimate recovery is made;
(c) where it relates to an assessee to which sub-section (1) applies,––

15

(i) only that amount which exceeds the credit balance in the
provision for bad and doubtful debts account made under that
sub-section shall be allowed as deduction;
(ii) it shall be allowed only when the assessee has debited such
amount in that tax year to the provision for bad and doubtful debts
account made under that sub-section; and

20

(d) the account referred to in clause (c) shall be only one such account
under sub-section (1) and such account shall be related to all types of
advances, including advances made by rural branches.
(3) For the purposes of this sub-section (2),––

25

30

35

(a) any bad debt or part of it written off as irrecoverable shall not
include any provision for bad and doubtful debt;
(b) any amount of bad debt or part of it, which has been taken into
account in computing the income of the assessee of the tax year in which the
amount of bad debt or part of it becomes irrevocable or of an earlier tax year,
as per income computation and disclosure standards notified under section
276(2) without recording it in the accounts, shall be allowed as a deduction in
computing the income of the assessee of the tax year in which it becomes
irrecoverable and such bad debt or part of it shall be deemed to be written off
as irrevocable in the accounts for the purposes of sub-section (2).
32. (1) The following amounts shall be allowed as deduction in computing
income chargeable under section 26:––
(a) bonus or commission paid to an employee for services rendered,
but only when such sum would not have been payable to the employee as
profits or dividend if it had not been paid as bonus or commission;

40

(b) interest paid in respect of capital borrowed for the purposes of
business or profession, where––
(i) interest shall not include interest on capital borrowed for
acquisition of an asset, whether capitalised in the books of account or
not, for any period beginning from the date the capital was borrowed for
acquisition of the asset till the date that asset was first put to use;

45

50

(ii) recurring subscriptions paid periodically by shareholders or
subscribers in Mutual Benefit Societies fulfilling the conditions as
prescribed, shall be deemed to be capital borrowed;
(c) contribution paid by a public financial institution to the credit
guarantee fund trust for small industries as the Central Government may,
by notification, specify;

Other
deductions.

54

(d) the pro rata amount of discount on a zero coupon bond having
regard to the period of life of such bond calculated in the manner, as
prescribed, where––
(i) “discount” means the difference between the amount
received or receivable by the infrastructure capital company or
infrastructure capital fund or public sector company or scheduled
bank issuing the bond, and the amount payable on maturity or
redemption of such bond;
(ii) “period of life of bond” means the period commencing from
the date of issue of the bond and ending on the date of the maturity
or redemption of such bond;

5

10

(e) the amount carried to a special reserve created and maintained by
a specified entity, subject to the following conditions:––
(i) the deduction shall not exceed 20% of the profits derived from
an eligible business computed under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” before any deductions under this clause; and
(ii) when the aggregate of such amounts carried to such reserve
account from time to time exceeds twice the amount of paid-up share
capital and of general reserves of the specified entity, no deduction
shall be allowable on such excess,

15

20

and for the purposes of this clause,––
(A) “specified entity” means—
(I) a financial corporation as specified in section 2(72) of the
Companies Act, 2013;
(II) a financial corporation which is a public sector company;

18 of 2013.
25

(III) a banking company;
(IV) a co-operative bank other than a primary agricultural credit
society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank;
(V) a housing finance company; and
(VI) any other financial corporation including a public
company;

30

(B) “eligible business” means,—
(I) in respect of any of the specified entities referred to in clauses
(e)(A)(I) to (IV), the business of providing long-term finance for—
(a) industrial or agricultural development;

35

(b) development of infrastructure facility in India; or
(c) development of housing in India;
(II) in respect of the specified entity referred to in clause (e)(A)(V),
the business of providing long-term finance for the construction or
purchase of houses in India for residential purposes; and

40

(III) in respect of the specified entity referred to in
clause (e)(A)(VI), the business of providing long-term finance for
development of infrastructure facility in India;
(C) “infrastructure facility” means—
(I) an infrastructure facility as defined in Explanation to
section 80-IA(4)(i) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other public
facility of a similar nature as notified by the Board in this behalf and
which fulfils the conditions as prescribed;

45
43 of 1961.

55

(II) an undertaking referred to in section 80-IA(4)(ii) or (iii) or
(iv) or (vi) of the Income-tax Act, 1961; and

43 of 1961.

(III) an undertaking referred to in section 141(5);
5

(f) any expenditure, not being capital expenditure, incurred by a
corporation or a body corporate, by whatever name called, if,—
(i) it is constituted or established by a Central Act or State Act
or Provincial Act;

10

(ii) it is notified by the Central Government for the purposes of
this clause having regard to the objects and purposes of the Act
referred to in sub-clause (i); and
(iii) the expenditure is incurred for the objects and purposes
authorised by the Act under which it is constituted or established;

15

(g) the expenditure incurred by a co-operative society engaged in the
business of manufacture of sugar, on purchase of sugarcane at a price equal
to or less than the price fixed or approved by the Government;
(h) marked to market loss or other expected loss as computed as per
the income computation and disclosure standards notified
under section 276(2) and no deduction or allowance for such loss shall be
allowed under any other provision of this Act;

20

25

(i) any expenditure bona fide incurred by a company for the purpose
of promoting family planning amongst its employees, subject to the
following conditions:––
(i) if such expenditure or any part of it is of capital nature,
one-fifth of it shall be deducted for the tax year in which it was
incurred and the balance shall be deducted in equal instalments for
each of the four immediately succeeding tax years;
(ii) the provisions of sections 33(11) and 112(3) shall apply to
deduction under this clause as they apply in relation to deductions
allowable in respect of depreciation;

30

35

40

(iii) the provisions of sections 38(1)(c), 39(4) (Table: Sl. No. 9)
and 45(6), shall apply to an asset representing capital expenditure for
promoting family planning, to the extent they apply to an asset
representing capital expenditure on scientific research;
(j) the amount being difference between the cost of animals used
for the purposes of the business or profession otherwise than as
stock-in-trade, as reduced by the amount realised from the carcasses
or animals, where such animals have died or become permanently
useless; and
(k) the amount paid as securities transaction tax or commodities
transaction tax, if––
(i) the taxable securities transactions or taxable commodities
transactions are entered into the course of the business during the tax
year; and

45

(ii) the income arising from such taxable securities transactions or
taxable commodities transactions is included in the income computed
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

56

Deduction for
depreciation.

33. (1) A deduction in respect of depreciation of—
(a) buildings, machinery, plant or furniture, being tangible assets;
(b) know-how, patents, copyrights, trademarks, licences, franchises
or any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, being
intangible assets acquired, not being goodwill of a business or profession,

5

owned wholly or partly by the assessee and used wholly and exclusively for the
purposes of the business or profession, shall be allowed, as per the provisions of
this section.
(2) In case of assets referred to in sub-section (1) of an undertaking
engaged in generation or generation and distribution of power, the depreciation
shall be a percentage of its actual cost to the assessee, as prescribed.

10

(3) (a) In case of any block of assets, depreciation shall be a percentage of
its written down value, as prescribed;
(b) when any asset forming part of the block of assets is partly, or not
wholly and exclusively, used for the purposes of the business or profession, the
deduction allowable shall be restricted to the fair proportionate part thereof as
determined by the Assessing Officer, having regard to the usage for the purposes
of the business or profession;
(c) when deduction of actual cost in respect of any machinery or plant has been
allowed under section 54, no deduction under this sub-section shall be allowed.

15

20

(4) The deduction under this section shall be restricted to 50% of the prescribed
rate, if such asset, being asset referred to in sub-sections (1), (2) and (8) is––
(a) acquired by the assessee during the tax year; and
(b) put to use for the purposes of business or profession for less than
one hundred and eighty days in that tax year.

25

(5) The allowable deduction calculated at the prescribed rates under this
section shall be allowed on pro rata basis based on number of days for which
assets were used by the following:––
(a) predecessor and successor, in case of a succession under
section 70(1)(zd) or (ze) or (zf), or section 313; or

30

(b) amalgamating company and the amalgamated company in case
of an amalgamation; or
(c) demerged company and the resulting company in case of a demerger.
(6) Where a building, not owned by the assessee, is held on lease or by any
other right of occupancy is used for the purposes of business or profession, and
if any capital expenditure is incurred by the assessee for the purposes of business
or profession on construction of any structure or any work by way of renovation,
extension or improvement to such building, then such structure or work shall be
treated as a building owned by the assessee for the purposes of this section.
(7) The provisions of this section shall apply even when the assessee has
not claimed deduction for depreciation in computing the total income.

35

40

(8) Further sum in addition to deduction under sub-section (3) shall be
allowed, when–—
(a) the assessee is engaged in the business of manufacture or
production of any article or thing or in the business of generation,
transmission or distribution of power;
(b) the assessee acquires and installs any new machinery or plant;

45

57

(c) the new machinery or plant is first put to use by the assessee for
the purposes of business; and
(d) the new machinery or plant—
(i) is not a ship or an aircraft;
5

(ii) was not used either within or outside India by any other
person before its installation by the assessee;
(iii) is not installed in any office premises or any residential
accommodation, including accommodation in the nature of a guest house;

10

(iv) is not in the nature of any office appliances or road
transport vehicle; and
(v) is not of a class of asset on which the whole of the actual
cost is allowable as a deduction (whether by way of depreciation or
otherwise) in computing the income under the head “Profits and
gains of business or profession” of any tax year.

15

(9) The additional deduction referred to in sub-section (8) shall be––
(a) 20% of the actual cost of the new machinery or plant in the tax
year when it is acquired and put to use; or

20

(b) 10% of the actual cost, if the new machinery or plant is acquired and
put to use for less than one hundred and eighty days in the relevant tax year, and
the remaining 10% shall be allowed in the immediately succeeding tax year.
(10) The difference between the written down value and the money
payable including the scrap value, if any, shall be allowed as deduction when
any tangible asset in respect of which depreciation is claimed and allowed under
sub-section (2)––

25

(a) is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed in the tax year not
being the tax year in which it is first put into use;
(b) the money payable including the scrap value, if any, is less than
its written down value; and

30

(c) such deficiency is actually written off in the books of account of
the assessee.
(11) (a) Where the profits and gains chargeable for the tax year before
allowing the deduction under sub-section (1) is less than the allowable deduction
under that sub-section, then––

35

(i) if such profits and gains is not a loss, the deduction under sub-section (1)
shall be allowed to the extent of the available profits and gains;
(ii) if such profits and gains is a loss, no deduction under
sub-section (1) shall be allowed;

40

(b) the amount of deduction which has not been allowed under clause (a)
shall be added to the allowable deduction under this section, whether available
or not, for the succeeding tax year and the total amount shall be deemed to be
eligible for deduction in that year, and so on for the succeeding tax years;
(c) the provisions of this sub-section shall be subject to the provisions of
sections 112(3) and 113(4); and

45

(d) any deduction in respect of any depreciation carried forward to the
succeeding tax year under this sub-section shall be deemed to be depreciation,
actually allowed.
(12) In this section,––

58
(a) “assets” mean—
(i) tangible assets, being buildings, machinery, plant or
furniture;
(ii) intangible assets being––
(A) know-how;

5

(B) patents;
(C) copyrights;
(D) trademarks;
(E) licences;
(F) franchises; or

10

(G) any other similar business or commercial rights, but
not being goodwill of a business or profession;
(b) “know-how” means any industrial information or technique
likely to assist in the manufacture or processing of goods or in the working
of a mine, oil-well or other sources of mineral deposits (including
searching for discovery or testing of deposits for the winning of access
thereto);
(c) “sold” includes a transfer by way of exchange or a compulsory
acquisition under any law for the time being in force but does not include a
transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation, of any asset by the amalgamating
company to the amalgamated company where the amalgamated company is
an Indian company or in a scheme of amalgamation of a banking company, as
referred to in section 5(c) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 with a banking
institution as referred to in section 45(15) of the said Act, sanctioned and
brought into force by the Central Government under section 45(7) of that Act,
of any asset by the banking company to the banking institution;

15

20

10 of 1949.
25

(d) “written down value of the block of assets” shall have the same
meaning as in section 41(1)(Table: Sl. No. 3)
General
conditions for
allowable
deductions.

34 (1) Any expenditure (not being an expenditure of the nature specified in
sections 28 to 33 and not being in the nature of capital expenditure or personal
expenses of the assessee), laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the
purposes of the business or profession shall be allowed in computing the income
chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), an expenditure laid out or expended
wholly and exclusively for business or profession by the assessee shall not include
any of the following:––

30

35

(a) an expenditure incurred for any purpose which is an offence or is
prohibited by law; or
(b) an expenditure incurred on the activities relating to corporate social
responsibility referred to in section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013; or

40

(c) an expenditure incurred on advertisement in any souvenir, brochure,
tract, pamphlet or the like, published by a political party.
(3) The expenditure mentioned in sub-section (2)(a) shall include expenditure
incurred for––
(a) any purpose which is an offence under, or is prohibited by, any law
in force in or outside India; or
(b) providing a benefit or perquisite in any form to a person, who may
or may not be carrying on a business or exercising a profession, when its
acceptance by the person is in violation of any law or rule or regulation or
guideline governing the conduct of that person; or

45

50

18 of 2013.

59

(c) compounding an offence under any law in force in or outside India; or
(d) settling proceedings initiated in relation to contravention under any
law notified by the Central Government in this behalf.
5

35. Irrespective of any other provision of Chapter IV-D, the following amounts
shall not be allowed as deduction in computing the income chargeable under the
head “Profits and gains of business or profession”:—
(a) any amount on account of––
(i) tax paid on income; or

10

(ii) tax paid by employer referred to in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 10); or
(iii) tax paid in any other country for which relief is eligible under
section 159 or 160,
and shall include any surcharge or cess on such tax, by whatever name called;

15

20

25

(b)(i) 30% of any sum payable to a resident on which tax is deductible
at source under Chapter XIX-B and during the tax year, such tax has not been
deducted or after deduction, has not been paid up to the due date specified in
section 263(1), where—
(A) tax is deducted and paid during any subsequent tax year,
deduction of such sum shall be allowed as a deduction in computing the
income in any subsequent tax year, in which such tax has been paid;
(B) the assessee is required to and fails to deduct whole or any
part of the tax under Chapter XIX-B but he is not deemed to be an
assessee in default under section 398(2), then for the purposes of this
sub-clause, the assessee shall be deemed to have deducted and paid
the tax on such sum on the date on which the return has been filed by
the payee referred to in section 398(2);
(ii) any interest, royalty, fees for technical services or other sum
chargeable under this Act which is payable––
(A) outside India; or

30

(B) in India to a non-resident (which is not a company) or to a
foreign company,
on which tax is deductible at source under Chapter XIX-B and during
the tax year, such tax, has not been deducted or after deduction, has not
been paid up to the due date specified in section 263(1), where––

35

40

45

(I) tax is deducted and paid during any subsequent tax year,
deduction of such sum shall be allowed as a deduction in computing the
income in any subsequent tax year, in which such tax has been paid;
(II) the assessee is required to and fails to deduct whole or any part
of the tax under Chapter XIX-B but he is not deemed to be an assessee
in default under section 398(2), then for the purposes of this sub-clause
the assessee shall be deemed to have deducted and paid the tax on such
sum on the date on which the return has been filed by the payee as
referred to in section 398(2);
(iii) any payment to a provident or other fund established for the benefit of
employees of the assessee, unless the assessee has made effective arrangements to
secure that tax shall be deducted at source under Chapter XIX-B from any
payments made from the fund which are chargeable to tax under the head
“Salaries”;

Amounts not
deductible in
certain
circumstances.

60
(c) any payment chargeable under the head “Salaries”, payable outside India
or to a non-resident on which tax is deductible at source under Chapter XIX-B and
such tax has not been deducted or, after deduction, has not been paid;
(d)(i) any consideration paid or payable to a non-resident for a specified
service on which equalisation levy is deductible under Chapter VIII of the
Finance Act, 2016 and such levy has not been deducted or, after deduction,
has not been paid up to the due date specified in section 263(1);

5
28 of 2016.

(ii) deduction of such consideration shall be allowed in any subsequent
tax year, in which such levy has been paid;
(e) any amount––

10

(i) paid by way of royalty, licence fee, service fee, privilege fee,
service charge or any other fee or charge, by whatever name called,
which is levied exclusively on; or
(ii) which is appropriated, directly or indirectly, from a State
Government undertaking, by the State Government;

15

(f) the expenditure incurred by a firm, assessable as such––
(i) in the nature of salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by
whatever name called (herein referred as remuneration) to a partner, who
is not a working partner; or
(ii) on the remuneration to a working partner and interest to any
partner, if it is––

20

(A) not authorised by the partnership deed applicable for the
period for which such remuneration or interest is paid; or
(B) authorised by and is as per the terms of partnership deed
but relates to the period prior to the date of such partnership deed,
or which was not authorised by the earlier partnership deed; or

25

(iii) on the aggregate remuneration to all working partners as
authorised by the partnership deed, exceeding the amount computed as
under:––
(A) on the first six lakh rupees of the book profit or in case
of a loss, three lakh rupees or 90% of the book profit, whichever
is higher;

30

(B) on the balance of the book profit at the rate of 60%; or
(iv) on interest to any partner as authorised by the partnership deed,
exceeding 12% simple interest per annum, and where an individual is a
partner in a firm, on behalf of or for the benefit of any other person, such
partner and any other person shall be referred as a “representative
partner” and the “person so represented”, respectively, then the
provisions of sub-clause (ii) and this sub-clause––
(A) shall not be applicable in respect of interest paid to such
individual not as a representative partner;

35

40

(B) shall be applicable in respect of interest paid to an
individual as a representative partner and the person so represented;
(C) shall not be applicable in respect of interest paid to a
partner, otherwise than as a representative partner, on behalf of or
for the benefit of any other person; or

45

61

(v) In this clause––

5

(A) “book profit” means the net profit, as shown in the profit
and loss account for the relevant tax year, computed as per
Chapter IV-D as increased by the aggregate amount of the
remuneration to all the partners of the firm, if such amount has
been deducted while computing the net profit;
(B) “working partner” means an individual who is actively
engaged in conducting the affairs of the business or profession of
the firm of which he is a partner;

10
21 of 1860.

15

20

(g) the expenditure incurred by an association of persons or a body of
individuals (other than a company, or a co-operative society or society
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or under any law
corresponding to that Act in force in any part of India)––
(i) in the nature of interest, salary, bonus, commission or
remuneration, by whatever name called, made to a member of such
association or body;
(ii) where the interest has been paid by the association or the body
to its member and such member has also paid interest to the association
or the body, then only such excess interest, if any, paid by the association
or body shall not be allowed under sub-clause (i);
(iii) where an individual is a member of an association or a body
on behalf, or for benefit of any other person, such member and any other
person shall be referred as “representative member” and “person so
represented”, respectively, then, the provisions of this clause––

25

(A) shall not be applicable in respect of interest paid to or
received from such individual not being a representative member;
(B) shall be applicable in respect of interest paid to or
received from an individual as a representative member and the
person so represented;

30

35

(C) shall not be applicable in respect of interest paid to a
member, otherwise than as representative member, on behalf or
for the benefit of any other person.
36. (1) The provisions of this section shall have effect irrespective of
anything to the contrary contained in any other provision of this Act relating to
computation of income under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”.
(2) If the assessee incurs any expenditure for which payment has been or
is to be made to any “specified person”, which in the opinion of the Assessing
Officer is excessive or unreasonable having regard to the––

40

(a) fair market value of the goods, services or facilities; or
(b) legitimate needs of the business or profession of the assessee; or
(c) benefit derived by or accruing to the assessee therefrom,
so much of the expenditure as considered excessive or unreasonable by him shall not
be allowed as a deduction.

Expenses or
payments not
deductible in
certain
circmstances.

62

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2),––
(a) “specified person”,––
(i) in relation to an assessee mentioned in column B of the Table
below, shall be the person referred to in column C thereof:—
5

Table
Sl. No.

Assessee

Specified person

A

B

C

1.

Individual.

Any relative of the assessee.

2.

Company.

Any director of the company or
his relative.

3.

Firm.

4.

Association of persons.

Member of the association or its
relative.

5.

Hindu undivided family.

Member of the family or his
relative.

10

Partner of the firm or its relative.

(ii) shall mean any person being an individual or company or firm
or association of persons or Hindu undivided family having substantial
interest in the business or profession of the assessee, or any director,
partner, member thereof or any relatives of such individual, director,
partner, member or any other company in which the first mentioned
company has substantial interest;
(iii) shall mean a company, firm, association of persons, or Hindu
undivided family whose director, partner or member has substantial
interest in the business or profession of the assessee, or any director,
partner or member thereof and their relatives, as the case may be;

15

20

25

(iv) shall mean any person carrying on a business or profession, in
which assessee, being––
(A) an individual or his relative; or
(B) a company, its directors or their relatives; or
(C) a firm, its partners or their relatives; or

30

(D) an association of persons, its members or their relatives; or
(E) a Hindu undivided family, its members or their relatives,
has substantial interest in the business or profession of such person;
(b) a person is deemed to have “substantial interest in the business or
profession” if, at any time during the tax year, such person is—
(i) the beneficial owner of shares (not being shares entitled to fixed
rate of dividend with or without a right to participate in profits) carrying
at least 20% of the voting power, in case of assessee being a company; and

35

63

(ii) entitled to at least 20% of the profits of the business or
profession in any other case, at any time during the tax year.

5

10

15

(4) Where any expenditure is incurred by the assessee and payment or
aggregate of payments made in a day to a person is exceeding ten thousand rupees
and is not through specified banking or online mode, then the expenditure by way
of such payments shall not be allowed as deduction.
(5) Where any deduction was made in any preceding tax year for a liability
incurred for any expenditure and payment in respect of such liability is made during
a subsequent tax year and if such payment or aggregate of payments made in a day
to a person exceeds ten thousand rupees and is not through specified banking or
online mode, such payment shall be deemed to be the income under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession” in such subsequent tax year.
(6) For the purposes of sub-sections (4) and (5), the figure “ten thousand
rupees” shall be read as “thirty-five thousand rupees” in case the payment is made
for plying, hiring or leasing of goods carriages.
(7) The provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5) shall not be applicable in
cases and circumstances, as prescribed, having regard to the nature and extent
of banking facilities available, considerations of business expediency and other
relevant factors.

20

25

(8) Nothing (with reference to mode of payment) contained in any other
law in force or in any contract, shall apply in respect of any payment which has
been made through specified banking or online mode, in compliance of
sub-sections (4) to (7), and no plea shall be allowed to be raised, in any suit or
other proceeding on the ground that the payment was not made or tendered in
cash or in mode other than through specified banking or online mode.
37. (1) The following sums payable, as specified in sub-section (2), shall be
allowed as deduction while computing the income chargeable under section 26 only
in the tax year in which such sums are actually paid irrespective of––
(a) any provision to the contrary in this Act; or

30

(b) method of accounting regularly followed; or
(c) the tax year in which the liability was incurred.
(2) The sums payable by an assessee referred to in sub-section (1), shall be––
(a) tax, duty, cess, surcharge or fee, by whatever named called, levied
under any law in force;

35

(b) contribution of the employer to a provident fund or superannuation
fund or gratuity fund or any fund for the welfare of employees;
(c) amount payable by employer in lieu of any leave at the credit of the
employee;
(d) any sum referred to in section 32(a);

40

(e) interest on loans or borrowings from specified financial entities as
per the terms and conditions of the agreement governing such loans or
advances;
(f) amount payable to the Indian Railways for use of railway assets; or

Certain
deductions
allowed on
actual payment
basis only.

64

(g) amount payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise beyond
the time limit specified in section 15 of the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
(3) In case the amounts specified in sub-section (2), except the sum referred
to in clause (g) thereof, are paid after the end of the tax year in which the liability
was incurred, but on or before the due date of filing of return of income under
section 263(1) for such tax year, the deduction towards such sum shall be allowed
in such tax year.
(4) If interest on loans or advances specified in sub-section (2)(e) is converted into
a loan or advance or debenture or any other instrument by which the liability to pay is
deferred to a future date, then it shall not be deemed to have been actually paid.

27 of 2006.

5

10

(5) If a deduction in respect of any sum payable under sub-section (2) has
already been allowed in any tax year when such liability was incurred, it shall not
be allowed again in any subsequent tax year when paid.
(6) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a sum received by the
assessee from any employee as contribution towards any of the funds referred to in
section 2(49)(o).
(7) For the purposes of this section, “specified financial entities” means a
public financial institution or State Finance Corporation or State Industrial
Investment Corporation or notified class of non-banking financial companies or
scheduled banks or co-operative banks (other than a primary agricultural credit
society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank).
Certain sums
deemed as
profits and gains
of business or
profession.

38. (1) The following sums shall be deemed to be profit and gains of business
or profession and shall be chargeable to income-tax, in the manner specified below,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (2):––

15

20

25

(a) where an allowance or deduction has been allowed in respect of any
loss, expenditure or trading liability incurred by the assessee during any tax
year, then,—
(i) the value of any benefit accruing to the assessee by way of
cessation or remission of such trading liability, including a unilateral act
of write-off of such liability in his accounts, in the tax year in which such
benefit accrues; or
(ii) any amount obtained by the assessee, whether in cash or
otherwise, in respect of such loss or expenditure incurred, in the tax year
in which the amount is obtained,

30

35

whether the business or profession in respect of which the allowance or
deduction was made is in existence in that year or not;
(b) in a case where any tangible asset, which is owned by assessee, is
sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed, and the money payable for the asset,
together with the scrap value [A] exceeds the written down value of the assets
[C], the sum as computed below, in the tax year in which the money payable
for the tangible asset becomes due––

40

(i) where the money payable for the asset together with the scrap
value [A] is less than the actual cost of the asset [B], then—
[A] – [C]; or
(ii) in any other case,—
[B] – [C];

45

65

5

10

(c) in a case where an asset representing expenditure of a capital nature on
scientific research, referred to in section 45(1)(a) or (c) is sold, without having
been used for other purposes, and the sale proceeds together with the total
deductions allowed under that section exceed the amount of capital expenditure,
the excess or the amount of deduction so made, whichever is less, in the tax year
in which the asset was sold;
(d) in a case where a deduction has been allowed for a bad debt (or part of it)
under the provisions of section 31(2), and any amount subsequently recovered
exceeds the difference between such debt and the amount allowed, then the
amount in excess, in the tax year in which recovery is made;
(e) in a case where a deduction has been allowed for any special reserve
created and maintained under the provisions of section 32(e), any amount
subsequently withdrawn from such reserve, in the tax year in which the
amount is withdrawn.

15

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply subject to fulfilment of the
following conditions:—
(a) in respect of sub-section (1)(a), only when an allowance or deduction
has been made in assessment for any earlier tax year towards the trading
liability, loss or expenditure incurred;

20

(b) in respect of sub-section (1)(b), only when the asset owned by the
assessee, has been used for the purpose of business, and depreciation has been
claimed and allowed thereon under section 33;
(c) in respect of sub-section (1)(c) of the said sub-section, only when the
assets has not been used for other purposes.

25

30

(3) Where the business or profession referred to in this section is no longer in
existence and there is income chargeable to tax under of sub-section (1)(a), (c), (d)
and (e), in respect of that business or profession, any loss, not being a loss sustained
in speculation business, which arose in that business or profession during the tax
year in which it ceased to exist and which could not be set off against any other
income of that tax year shall, so far as may be, be set off against the income
chargeable to tax under the said clauses of that sub-section.
(4) In respect of sums referred to in sub-section (1)(a), if the benefit accrues to, or
amount is obtained, by the successor in business, the value of benefit or the amount shall
be chargeable to income-tax as income in the hands of successor in business.

35

(5) The provisions of sub-section (1)(b), (c), (d) and (e) shall apply in a tax year
even if the business is no longer in existence.
(6) In this section,––

40

(a) “sold” includes a transfer by way of exchange or a compulsory
acquisition under any law for the time being in force but does not include a transfer,
in a scheme of amalgamation, of any asset by the amalgamating company to the
amalgamated company where the amalgamated company is an Indian company;
(b) “successor in business”means and includes––
(i) the amalgamated company, where there has been an
amalgamation;

45

(ii) the resulting company, where there has been a demerger;
(iii) where the assessee is succeeded by any other person in that
business or profession, that other person;
(iv) where a firm carrying on a business or profession is succeeded by
another firm, that other firm.

66

Computation of
actual cost.

39. (1) The actual cost of an asset used for the purposes of the business or profession
shall be the actual cost to the assessee as, reduced by the following amounts:—
(a) part of cost of asset, if any, met by any other person or authority,
directly or indirectly;
(b) goods and services tax paid in respect of which input tax credit has
been claimed and allowed under the relevant law;

5
51 of 1975.

(c) additional duty leviable under section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975
in respect of which a claim of credit has been made and allowed under the Central
Excise Rules, 1944;
(d) subsidy, grant or reimbursement, by whatever name called, if any,
relatable to the acquisition of the asset, received by the assessee from—

10

(i) the Central Government;
(ii) a State Government;
(iii) any authority established under any law; or
15

(iv) any other person.
(2) The payment or aggregate of payments exceeding ten thousand rupees in
a day for acquisition of an asset, made to a person in a mode otherwise than by
specified banking or online mode, shall be excluded from the actual cost of the asset.
(3) In a case where the subsidy, grant or reimbursement referred to in
sub-section (1)(d) is not directly relatable to the asset acquired, the amount of
reduction under sub-section (1)(d) shall be determined as under:

20

𝐵
𝐴×( )
𝐶
Where,—
A = total amount of subsidy, grant or reimbursement not directly relatable to
the asset;

25

B = cost of the asset acquired for which actual cost is to be determined;
C = cost of all the assets in respect of or in reference to which the subsidy or
grant or reimbursement is so received.
(4) In circumstances specified under column B of the Table below, the actual
cost of the capital asset shall be as specified in column C thereof.

30

Table
Sl. No.

Specified circumstances

Determination of actual cost

A

B

C

1.

Where capital asset is transferred
by an amalgamating company to an
amalgamated company being an
Indian company in a scheme of
amalgamation.

Actual cost to amalgamated
company shall be the same as it
would have been if the
amalgamating
company
had
continued to hold such capital asset
for the purpose of its own business.

2.

Where capital asset is transferred
by a demerged company to a resulting
company being an Indian company in
a demerger.

Actual cost to resulting company
shall be the same as it would have
been, if the demerged company had
continued to hold such asset for the
purpose of its own business, which
shall not exceed the written down
value of such capital asset in the
hands of demerged company.

35

40

45

67

A

5

B

C

3.

Where inventory is converted
into capital asset.

Fair Market Value as on date of
conversion, as determined in the
manner as prescribed.

4.

Where capital asset is acquired
by the assessee by way of gift or
inheritance.

Actual cost to previous owner
as reduced by the depreciation
allowable up to the immediately
preceding tax year, as if such asset
was the only asset in the relevant
block of asset.

5.

Where a building, being the
property of the assessee, is put to use
for the purpose of business or
profession during the tax year.

Actual cost of the building as
reduced by the depreciation—

10

15

(a) that would have been
allowable had the building
been used for the purpose of
business from the date of
acquisition; and
(b) calculated at the rate
in force on the date on
which such asset was put to
use for business.

20

6.

Where capital asset is transferred
by—
(a) a holding company to its
subsidiary company; or

25

(b) a subsidiary company to its
holding company,

Actual cost to the transfereecompany shall be the same as it
would have been, if the transferor
company had continued to hold
such asset for the purpose of its
own business.

and the conditions of section 70(1)(c)
and (d) are satisfied.

30

7.

Where a capital asset, which
previously belonged to the assessee,
is reacquired by the assessee.

35

(a) Actual cost of the asset in
the hands of assessee, when it was
first acquired, as reduced by the
depreciation allowable up to the
immediately preceding tax year,
as if such asset was the only asset
in the relevant block of asset; or
(b) actual price for which such
asset is reacquired by the assesse,

40

whichever is lower.
8.

45

50

Where the capital asset is
acquired by the assessee from
previous owner and subsequently
asset is given back to the previous
owner by way of lease, hire or
otherwise, and—
(a) the asset was being used
for the purpose of business by the
previous owner; and
(b) depreciation has been
claimed by the previous owner.

Actual cost of asset to the
assessee shall be the written down
value of the asset in the hands of
the previous owner at the time of
transfer by the previous owner.

68

A
9.

10.

11.

12.

B

C

Where the capital asset is used in
business after it ceases to be used for
scientific research related to that
business and a deduction is made
under section 33(3).

Actual cost of asset as reduced
by deduction allowed for the
capital asset under section 45(1)(a)
or (c) or under any corresponding
provision of the Income-tax Act,
1961(43 of 1961).

Where the assessee had acquired
an asset outside India, as a nonresident, and the asset is brought by
him to India and put to use in
business or profession in India.

Actual cost of the asset as
reduced by the depreciation––

Where capital asset is acquired
under the scheme of corporatisation
of a recognised stock exchange
approved by the Securities and
Exchange Board of India.

5

(a) that would have been
allowable had the asset been
used for the purpose of business
or profession in India since the
date of its acquisition; and

10

(b) calculated at the rate in
force.

15

Actual cost of the asset, as if
there was no corporatisation.
20

(a) Where deduction under
Actual cost shall be deemed to
section 46 was allowed or allowable be nil.
in respect of the capital asset—
(i) to the assessee; or

25

(ii) to any person and the
assessee acquires or receives
such asset through special modes
of acquisition from such person.
(b) Where deduction allowed
under section 46 in respect of a
capital asset becomes deemed
income as per section 46(9)(b).

Actual cost of the asset as
reduced by the depreciation,—
(a) that would have been
allowable had the asset been
used for the purpose of
business since date of
acquisition; and

30

35

(b) calculated at the rate in
force.
13.

Where any amount is paid or
payable as interest in connection
with the acquisition of an asset.

Actual cost shall not include so
much of such amount as is
relatable to any period after such
asset is first put to use.

(5) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (4), in a case where the asset
is acquired by the assessee, its actual cost shall be determined by the Assessing Officer
having regard to all circumstances of the case, subject to the following conditions:—

40

45

(a) the asset was used by any other person for the purposes of his
business, before such acquisition; and
(b) the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the main purpose of the transfer
of the asset was to reduce tax liability (by claiming depreciation on enhanced
actual cost).

50

69

(6) The determination of actual cost under sub-section (5) shall be made with
the prior approval of the Joint Commissioner.
(7) In this section, “special modes of acquisition” means acquisition—
(a) by way of a gift or will or an irrevocable trust; or
(b) upon distribution on the liquidation of a company; or

5

(c) by such mode of transfer as is referred to in section 70(1)(a), (c), (d), (e),
(j), (zd), (ze) and (zf).
40. (1) For the purposes of computation of income under the head “Profits and
gains of business or profession”, cost of acquisition of an asset acquired by––
(a) an amalgamated company under a scheme of amalgamation; or

10

(b) an assessee, under a gift, or will, or an irrevocable trust, or on total
or partial partition of a Hindu undivided family,

Special
provision for
computation of
cost of
acquisition of
certain assets.

when sold as stock-in-trade shall be the sum of—
(i) cost of acquisition of the said asset in the hands of the amalgamating
company in case of clause (a), or the transferor or donor in case of clause (b);

15

(ii) any cost of improvement made;
(iii) any expenditure incurred by the amalgamating company or
transferor or donor wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer.
(2) This section shall not apply to an asset referred to in section 67(6).
20

41. (1) For the purposes of different provisions for computation of income under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”, written down value for the tax
year shall be as mentioned in column C of the Table below:—
Table
Sl. No.

25

43 of 1961.

Circumstances

Written down value
C

A

B

1.

In case the asset is
acquired in the tax year.

2.

In case the asset
Actual cost to the assessee less depreciation
is acquired before actually allowed under this Act or the Income-tax
the tax year.
Act, 1961.

3.

In case of block
of assets.

30

Actual cost to the assessee.

[(A-D)+ B-C]-E.

Note:–– In column C,—
35

A = the written down value of the block of assets in the immediately
preceding tax year;
B = actual cost of any asset falling within that block, acquired during the
tax year;

40

C = moneys payable together with scrap value, if any, in respect of any
asset falling within the block, which is sold, transferred, demolished, destroyed
or discarded during the tax year, where “C” shall not exceed (A-D)+B;
D = depreciation actually allowed in respect of block of assets in relation
to the said immediately preceding tax year;

45

E = in the case of a slump sale, the actual cost of the asset falling within
that block as reduced by depreciation allowable from the tax year 1988-1989
onwards, as if the asset was the only asset in the relevant block of assets, which
shall not exceed [(A-D)+B-C].

Written down
value of
depreciable
asset.

70

A

B

C

4.

Where any block of asset
is transferred by—

Written down value in the hands of
the transferee company or amalgamated
company is the same as written down
value in the hands of transferor company
or amalgamating company, as the case
may be, at the beginning of the tax year
in which such transfer took place.

(a)(i)
a
holding
company to its subsidiary
company; or
(ii) a subsidiary
company to its holding
company
and
the
conditions of section
70(1)(c) and (d) are
satisfied; or

10

(b) amalgamating
company
to
the
amalgamated company
being
an
Indian
company.
5.

6.

7.

Where any asset, forming
part of a block of assets is
transferred by a demerged
company to a resulting
company.

5

15

Written down value of block of
assets––

20

(a) for demerged company (for
the immediately preceding tax
year), shall be the written down
value in the immediately preceding
tax year as reduced by the written
down value of the assets
transferred to the resulting
company pursuant to such
demerger;

25

(b) for resulting company, shall
be the written down value of the
assets transferred from the
demerged company immediately
before such demerger.

30

Where any block of assets
is transferred by a private
company or unlisted public
company to a limited liability
partnership and the conditions
in section 70(1)(ze) are
satisfied.

Written down value in the hands of
limited liability partnership shall be
written down value in the hands of said
company as on the date of conversion of
the company into limited liability
partnership.

35

Where any asset forming
part of the block of assets is
transferred to a company
under the scheme of
corporatisation
of
a
recognised stock exchange in
India approved by the
Securities and Exchange
Board of India.

Written down value of the block of
assets in the hands of resulting company,
shall be the written down value of the
assets transferred immediately before
such transfer.

40

45

50

71

5

10

A

B

C

8.

In a case of succession in
business or profession under
section 313, where an
assessment is made in the
hands of successor under
section 313 (2).

Written down value of any asset or
block of assets shall be the amount
which would have been taken as its
written down value, if the assessment
had been made directly on the person
succeeded to.

(2) Any allowance in respect of any depreciation carried forward under
section 33(11) shall be deemed to be the depreciation actually allowed.
(3) Where an assessee was not required to compute his total income for the
purposes of this Act for any tax year or tax years preceding the tax year under
consideration,—

15

(a) the actual cost of an asset shall be adjusted by the amount attributable
to the revaluation of such asset, if any, in the books of account;
(b) the total amount of depreciation on such asset provided in the books
of account of the assessee in respect of such tax year or tax years preceding
the tax year under consideration shall be deemed to be the depreciation
actually allowed under this Act for the purposes of this clause; and

20

25

43 of 1961.
30

35

(c) the depreciation actually allowed under clause (b) shall be adjusted
by the amount of depreciation attributable to such revaluation of the asset.
(4) For the purposes of this section, where the income of an assessee is derived,
in part from agriculture and in part from business chargeable to income-tax under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”, for computing the written
down value of assets acquired before the tax year, the total amount of depreciation
shall be computed as if the entire income is derived from the business of the assessee
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” and the depreciation so
computed shall be deemed to be the depreciation actually allowed under this Act or
under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
(5) In this section, “sold” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 38(6)(a).
42. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in any other provision of this Act,
where at the time of making payment during the tax year, there is a variation in
liability of an assessee as expressed in Indian currency due to change in rate of
exchange in relation to an asset acquired for the purpose of business or profession
in foreign currency from a country outside India, it shall be dealt with in the manner
specified in sub-sections (2) and (3).
(2) For this section, “variation in liability” shall be computed as—
A = B-C

40

where,—
A = variation in the liability;
B = amount paid in Indian currency (excluding any part met, directly or
indirectly, by any other person or authority) during the tax year for acquisition
of the asset for—

45

(a) the whole or part of the cost of asset; or
(b) repayment of money borrowed along with interest in foreign
currency, specifically for acquiring such asset;

Capitalising the
impact of
foreign
exchange
fluctuation.

72

C = liability, corresponding to the amount referred in B, in Indian
currency at the time of acquisition of such asset.
(3) The variation in liability shall be added or reduced from the—
(a) actual cost of the asset as referred in section 39; or
(b) expenditure of capital nature referred to in section 45(1)(a) or (c) or
32(i); or

5

(c) cost of acquisition of a capital asset (not being capital asset referred
to in section 74) for the purpose of section 72,
and the amount arrived at after such addition or deduction shall be taken to be
the actual cost of the asset or the amount of expenditure of a capital nature or, as the
case may be, the cost of acquisition of the capital asset.
(4) Where the assessee has entered into a contract with an authorised dealer as
defined in section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, for providing him
with a specified sum in a foreign currency on or after a stipulated future date at the rate
of exchange specified in the contract to enable him to meet the whole or any part of the
said liability, the amount, if any, to be added to, or deducted from, the actual cost of the
asset or the amount of expenditure of a capital nature or, as the case may be, the cost of
acquisition of the capital asset under this section shall, in respect of so much of the sum
specified in the contract as is available for discharging the said liability, be computed
with reference to the rate of exchange specified therein.
Taxation of
foreign
exchange
fluctuation.

10

42 of 1999.
15

20

43. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 42 any gain or loss arising on
account of change in foreign exchange rates on foreign currency transactions shall
be treated as income or loss, and shall be computed as per the income computation
and disclosure standards notified under section 276(2).
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be applicable to all foreign currency
transactions including—

25

(a) monetary items and non-monetary items;
(b) translation of financial statements of foreign operations;
(c) forward exchange contracts; and
(d) foreign currency translation reserves.
Amortisation of
certain
preliminary
expenses.

30

44. (1) If an assessee, being an Indian company or a person (other than a
company), who is resident in India, incurs any expenditure specified in sub-section (2)—
(a) before the commencement of its business; or
(b) after the commencement of its business, in connection with the
extension of its undertaking or in connection with its setting up a new unit,

35

the assessee shall be allowed a deduction of an amount equal to one-fifth of such
expenditure for each of the five successive tax years beginning with—
(i) the tax year in which the business commences, for clause (a); or
(ii) the tax year in which the extension of the undertaking is completed
or the new unit commences production or operation, for clause (b).

40

(2) The expenditure referred to in sub-section (1) shall be—
(a) the expenditure in connection with—
(i) preparation of feasibility report;
(ii) preparation of project report;
(iii) conducting market survey or any other survey necessary for
the business;

45

73

(iv) engineering services relating to the business;
(b) legal charges for drafting any agreement between the assessee and any
other person for any purpose relating to the setting up or conduct of the business;
(c) if the assessee is a company,—
5

(i) legal charges for drafting and printing of the Memorandum and
Articles of Association of the company;
(ii) fees for registering the company under the provisions of the
Companies Act, 2013;

18 of 2013.

10

(iii) expenditure in connection with the issue, for public
subscription, of shares in or debentures of the company, being
underwriting commission, brokerage and charges for drafting, typing,
printing and advertisement of the prospectus; and
(d) such other items of expenditure (not being expenditure eligible for any
allowance or deduction under any other provision of this Act), as prescribed.

15

(3) In relation to expenditure specified in sub-section (2)(a), the assessee shall
furnish a statement containing the particulars of the expenditure in such form and
manner, as prescribed.
(4) The total expenditure referred to in sub-section (2) shall be restricted to 5%—
(a) of the cost of the project; or

20

(b) of the capital employed in the business of the company, where the
assessee is an Indian company, at its option.
(5) In this section,—

25

(a) “cost of the project” means the actual cost of the fixed assets, being
land, buildings, leaseholds, plant, machinery, furniture, fittings and railway
sidings (including expenditure on development of land and buildings) and—
(i) for cases under sub-section (1)(a), the cost is calculated as of
the last day of the tax year when the business commences;

30

(ii) for cases under sub-section (1)(b), the cost is calculated as of
the last day of the tax year when either the extension of the undertaking
is completed, or the new unit commences production or operations,
which only includes fixed assets acquired or developed in connection
with the extension of the undertaking or setting up of new unit;
(b) “capital employed in the business of the company” means—

35

(i) in cases under sub-section (1)(a), the aggregate of the issued
share capital, debentures and long-term borrowings as on the last day of
the tax year in which the business of the company commences;

40

(ii) in a case under sub-section (1)(b), the aggregate of the issued
share capital, debentures and long-term borrowings as on the last day of
the tax year in which the extension of the undertaking is completed or,
as the case may be, the new unit commences production or operation, in
so far as such capital, debentures and long-term borrowings have been
issued or obtained in connection with the extension of the undertaking
or the setting up of the new unit of the company;
(c) “long-term borrowings” means—

45

(i) any moneys borrowed by the company from Government or IFCI
Ltd., or ICICI Ltd., or any other financial institution which is eligible for
deduction under section 32(e) or any banking institution (not being a
financial institution referred to above); or

74

(ii) any loan or debt incurred by it in a foreign country in respect
of the purchase outside India of capital plant and machinery, where the
tenure of loan or debt is not less than seven years.
(6) If the assessee is a person, other than a company or a co-operative society,
no deduction shall be admissible under sub-section (1) unless,—

5

(a) the accounts of the assessee for the year or years in which the
expenditure specified in sub-section (2) is incurred have been audited by an
accountant before the specified date referred to in section 63; and
(b) the assessee furnishes for the first year in which the deduction under this
section is claimed, the report of such audit by such date in such form duly signed
and verified by such accountant and setting forth such particulars, as prescribed.

10

(7) If an undertaking of Indian company entitled for deduction under
sub-section (1) is transferred before expiry of five years specified in the said
sub-section, in a scheme of amalgamation, to another Indian company, then—
(a) no deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed to the amalgamating
company for the tax year in which amalgamation takes place; and

15

(b) all provisions of this section shall continue to apply to the
amalgamated company as they would have applied to the amalgamating
company, as if the amalgamation has not taken place.
(8) If an undertaking of Indian company entitled for deduction under
sub-section (1) is transferred before five years specified in the said sub-section, in a
scheme of demerger to another company, then—

20

(a) no deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed to the demerged
company for the tax year in which demerger takes place; and
(b) all provisions of this section shall continue to apply to the resulting
company as they would have applied to the demerged company, as if the
demerger has not taken place.
(9) If a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any tax year in
respect of any expenditure referred to in sub-section (2), deduction shall not be
allowed for such expenditure under any other provision of this Act for the same or
any other tax year.
Expenditure on
scientific
research.

25

30

45. (1) A deduction shall be allowed for any expenditure, being in the
nature of––
(a) capital expenditure, but not on acquisition of land, as such or as part
of any property; or

35

(b) revenue expenditure; or
(c) both,
incurred on scientific research related to the business of the assessee subject to
provisions of this section.
(2)(a) A deduction shall be allowed under sub-section (1) in respect of the
aggregate of expenditure (not being in the nature of capital expenditure), related to
business, incurred on—

40

(i) salary to an employee engaged in such scientific research; or
(ii) purchase of materials used in such scientific research,
where such expenditure is incurred within three years immediately preceding the
commencement of business, to the extent certified by the prescribed authority as
incurred on such research, expenditure shall be deemed to have been incurred in the
tax year in which the business is commenced.

45

75

(b) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the aggregate of capital expenditure
incurred within three years immediately preceding the commencement of
business shall be deemed to have been incurred in the tax year in which the
business is commenced.
5

(c)(i) A deduction shall be allowed under sub-section (1), in respect of any
expenditure incurred (not being expenditure in the nature of cost of any land or
building) by a company engaged in the business of—
(A) bio-technology; or

10

(B) manufacture or production of any article or thing, which is not
specified in Schedule XIII,
on in-house research and development facility as approved by the prescribed
authority, subject to the conditions and manner, as prescribed;
(ii) No deduction shall be allowed under this clause to a company approved
under sub-section (3)(b)(ii);

15

(iii) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of the expenditure mentioned in
sub-clause (i) under any other provision of this Act;
(iv) The expenditure under sub-clause (i) shall be allowed subject to such
conditions and on furnishing of documents in such form and manner, as prescribed;

20
39 of 1970.

(d) For the purposes of clause (c), expenditure on “scientific research”, in relation
to drugs and pharmaceuticals, shall include expenditure incurred on clinical drug trial,
obtaining approval from any regulatory authority under any Central Act or State Act or
Provincial Act and filing an application for a patent under the Patents Act, 1970.
(3) A deduction shall be allowed for any sum, paid to—

25

(a)(i) a research association having the object of undertaking scientific
research or to a University, college or institution to be used for scientific
research; or
(ii) a research association having the object of undertaking research in
social science or statistical research or to a University, college or institution to
be used for research in social science or statistical research;

30

(b) a company which is––
(i) registered in India having the main object of scientific research
and development; and
(ii) approved by such authority, in such manner and subject to such
conditions, as prescribed;

35

(c)(i) a national laboratory; or
(ii) a University; or
(iii) an Indian Institute of Technology; or
(iv) a specified person,

40

with a specific direction that the said sum shall be used for scientific research
undertaken under a programme approved in this behalf by the prescribed authority.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3),––
(a) the expenditure shall be allowed subject to such conditions and on
furnishing of documents in such form and manner, as prescribed; and

45

(b) in respect of clause (a) of the said sub-section, only such association,
University, college or other institution shall be eligible for deduction, which for
the time being is approved in the manner and subject to such conditions, as
prescribed, and is specified by the Central Government, by notification.

76

(5) The deduction for any sum under sub-section (3) shall not be denied merely
on the ground that subsequent to the payment of such sum by the assessee, the
approval granted to such entities or the programme undertaken by entities as
mentioned in sub-section(3)(c), has been withdrawn.
(6) Where a deduction is allowed for any tax year under this section in respect of
expenditure, represented wholly or partly by an asset, no deduction shall be allowed under
section 33(3) for the same or any other tax year in respect of that asset.

5

(7) The provisions of section 33(11) in respect of depreciation shall apply
in relation to deductions allowable for capital expenditure under sub-section (1).
(8) No deduction in respect of the sum mentioned in sub-section (3)(c) shall be
allowed under any other provision of this Act.

10

(9) If any question arises under this section as to whether, and if so, to what extent
any activity constitutes or constituted scientific research, or any asset is or was being
used, for scientific research, the Board shall refer the question to—
(a) the Central Government, when such question relates to any activity
under sub-section (3)(a), and its decision shall be final;

15

(b) the prescribed authority, when such question relates to any other activity,
whose decision shall be final.
(10) When an amalgamating company, in a scheme of amalgamation, sells or
otherwise transfers to the amalgamated company (being an Indian company) any asset
representing capital expenditure on scientific research, the provisions of this section
shall apply to the amalgamated company as they would have applied to the
amalgamating company if the latter had not so sold or otherwise transferred the asset.

20

(11) In this section,—
(a) “National Laboratory” means a scientific laboratory functioning at the
national level under the aegis of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, the
Indian Council of Medical Research, the Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research, the Defence Research and Development Organisation, the Department
of Electronics, the Department of Bio-Technology or the Department of Atomic
Energy and which is approved as a National Laboratory by such authority and in
such manner, as prescribed;

25

30

(b) “specified person” means such person approved by the prescribed
authority;
(c) “land” includes any interest in land.
Capital
expenditure of
specified
business.

46. (1) An assessee, at his option, shall be allowed a deduction of the whole of the
capital expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the purposes of any specified
business carried on by him during the tax year in which such expenditure is incurred.
(2) Where the expenditure referred to in sub-section (1) is incurred prior to the
commencement of its operations and such expenditure is capitalised in the books of
account as on the date of commencement of its operations, it shall be allowed during the
tax year in which such business is commenced.

35

40

(3) This section shall apply to the specified business fulfilling the following
conditions:—
(a) it is not set up by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of an already existing
business;
(b) it is not set up by the transfer of machinery or plant previously used for
any purpose to the specified business;
(c) if the business is of the nature referred to in sub-section (11)(d)(iii) and
such business—

45

77

(i) is owned by a company formed and registered in India under the
Companies Act, 2013 or by a consortium of such companies or by an
authority or a board or a corporation established or constituted under any
Central Act or State Act;

18 of 2013.

(ii) has been approved by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory
Board established under section 3(1) of the Petroleum and Natural Gas
Regulatory Board Act, 2006 and notified by the Central Government in
this behalf;

5
19 of 2006.

(iii) has made not less than such proportion of its total pipeline
capacity as specified by regulations made by the Petroleum and Natural
Gas Regulatory Board established under section 3(1) of the Petroleum and
Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 available for use on common
carrier basis by any person other than the assessee or an associated person;
and

10
19 of 2006.

(iv) fulfils any other condition as prescribed;

15

(d) if the business is of the nature referred to in sub-section (11)(d)(xiv),
such business,—
(i) is owned by a company registered in India or by a consortium of
such companies or by an authority or a board or corporation or any other
body established or constituted under any Central Act or State Act;

20

(ii) entity referred to in sub-clause (i) has entered into an agreement
with the Central Government or a State Government or a local authority
or any other statutory body for developing or operating and maintaining
or developing, operating and maintaining a new infrastructure facility.
25

30

(4) No deduction shall be allowed under the provisions of section 144 and
Chapter VIII-C in relation to such specified business for the same or any other tax
year, if a deduction under sub-section (1) is claimed and allowed.
(5) No deduction in respect of the expenditure referred to in sub-section (1) shall
be allowed to the assessee under any other section in any tax year or under this section
in any other tax year, if the deduction has been claimed and allowed to him under this
section.
(6) The provisions of this section shall apply to the specified business referred
to in column B of the Table below if it commences its operations as specified in
column C thereof.
Table

35

40

Sl. No.

Nature of specified business

Date of commencement
of operations being on or
after

A

B

C

1.

Laying and operating a crosscountry natural gas pipeline network for
distribution, including storage facilities
being an integral part of such network.

1st April, 2007.

2.

Building and operating a new hotel
of two-star or above category as classified
by the Central Government.

1st April, 2010.

3.

Building and operating a new
hospital with at least 100 beds for
patients.

1st April, 2010.

45

78

A

B

C

4.

Developing and building a housing
project under a scheme for slum
redevelopment or rehabilitation framed
by the Central Government or a State
Government, as notified by the Board, as
per the guidelines as notified by the
Board.

1st April, 2010.

Developing and building a housing
project under a scheme for affordable
housing framed by the Central
Government or a State Government, as
notified by the Board, as per the
guidelines notified by the Board.

1st April, 2011.

6.

A new plant or a newly installed
capacity in an existing plant for
production of fertilizer.

1st April, 2011.

7.

Setting up and operating an inland
container depot or a container freight
station notified or approved under the
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962).

1st April, 2012.

8.

Bee-keeping and production of
honey and beeswax.

1st April, 2012.

9.

Setting up and operating a
warehousing facility for storage of sugar.

1st April, 2012.

10.

Laying and operating a slurry
pipeline for the transportation of iron ore.

1st April, 2014.

11.

Setting up and operating a semiconductor
wafer
fabrication
manufacturing unit, as notified by the
Board, and as per such guidelines as
notified by the Board.

1st April, 2014.

Developing, or operating and
maintaining, or developing, operating and
maintaining, any infrastructure facility.

1st April, 2017.

5.

12.

13.

In all other cases.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Th 1st April, 2009.

(7) Where the assessee builds a hotel of two star or above category as classified
by the Central Government and subsequently, transfers the hotel operation thereof to
another person while retaining its ownership, the assessee shall be deemed to be
carrying on the specified business referred to in sub-section (11)(d)(iv).

40

(8) The provisions contained in sections 122(6) and 138(18) and (23) shall, so
far as may be, apply to this section in respect of goods or services or assets held for
the purposes of the specified business.
(9) Any asset for which a deduction is claimed and allowed under this section––
(a) shall be used only for the specified business for a period of eight years
beginning with the tax year in which such asset is acquired or constructed;

45

79

5

1 of 1986.
1 of 2004.

10

(b) is used for the purpose and period other than that referred to in
clause (a), and is not chargeable to tax under section 26(2)(k), then the total
amount of deduction so claimed and allowed in one or more tax years, as
reduced by the amount of depreciation allowable under section 33, as if no
deduction under this section was allowed, shall be the income chargeable under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” of the tax year in which
the asset is so used.
(10) The provisions of sub-section (9)(b) shall not apply to a company which
has become a sick industrial company under section 17(1) of the Sick Industrial
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985, as it stood before its repeal by the Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Repeal Act, 2003 during the period
specified in sub-section (9)(a).
(11) In this section,—
(a) “associated person”, in relation to the assessee, means a person,—

15

(i) who participates, directly or indirectly, or through one or more
intermediaries in the management or control or capital of the assessee;
(ii) who holds, directly or indirectly, shares carrying at least 26% of
the voting power in the capital of the assessee;

20

(iii) who appoints more than half of the board of directors or
members of the governing board, or one or more executive directors or
executive members of the governing board of the assessee; or
(iv) who guarantees at least 10% of the total borrowings of the assessee;

25

(b) “cold chain facility” means a chain of facilities for storage or transportation
of agricultural and forest produce, meat and meat products, poultry, marine and
dairy products, products of horticulture, floriculture and apiculture and processed
food items under scientifically controlled conditions including refrigeration and
other facilities necessary for the preservation of such produce;
(c) “infrastructure facility” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the
Explanation to section 80-IA(4) of the Income-tax Act, 1961;

43 of 1961.
30

(d) “specified business” means any one or more of the following
businesses:—
(i) setting up and operating a cold chain facility;
(ii) setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of
agricultural produce;

35

(iii) laying and operating a cross-country natural gas or crude or
petroleum oil pipeline network for distribution, including storage facilities
being an integral part of such network;
(iv) building and operating, anywhere in India, a hotel of two star or
above category as classified by the Central Government;

40

(v) building and operating, anywhere in India, a hospital with at least
100 beds for patients;
(vi) developing and building a housing project under a scheme for
slum redevelopment or rehabilitation framed by the Central Government
or a State Government as per the guidelines notified by the Board;

80

(vii) developing and building a housing project under a scheme for
affordable housing framed by the Central Government or a State
Government as per the guidelines notified by the Board;
(viii) production of fertilizer in India;
(ix) setting up and operating an inland container depot or a container
freight station notified or approved under the Customs Act, 1962;

5
52 of 1962.

(x) bee-keeping and production of honey and beeswax;
(xi) setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar;
(xii) laying and operating a slurry pipeline for the transportation of
iron ore;

10

(xiii) setting up and operating a semiconductor wafer fabrication
manufacturing unit as per the guidelines notified by the Board;
(xiv) developing, or maintaining and operating, or developing,
maintaining and operating, a new infrastructure facility;
(e) any machinery or plant which was used outside India by any person
other than the assessee shall not be regarded as machinery or plant previously
used for any purpose, if—

15

(i) such machinery or plant was not, at any time before the date of
the installation by the assessee, used in India;
(ii) such machinery or plant is imported into India; and

20

(iii) no deduction of depreciation for such machinery or plant has
been allowed or is allowable under the provisions of this Act in computing
the total income of any person for any period before the date of installation
of the machinery or plant by the assessee;
(f) if any machinery or plant or its part previously used for any purpose is
transferred to the specified business and its total value does not exceed 20% of the
total value of the machinery or plant used in such business, then the conditions
specified in sub-section (3)(b) shall be deemed to be complied with;

25

(g) any expenditure of capital nature shall not include any expenditure––
(i) for which the payment or aggregate of payments made to a person
in a day, is not through specified banking or online mode, exceeds
ten thousand rupees; or

30

(ii) incurred on the acquisition of any land or goodwill or financial
instrument.
Expenditure on
agricultural
extension project
and skill
development
project.

47. (1) Any expenditure (excluding cost of any land or building) incurred, on––

35

(a) agricultural extension project by any assessee; or
(b) any skill development project by a company,
shall be allowed as a deduction, in the tax year in which such expenditure is incurred
provided such project is notified as per the guidelines issued by the Board.
(2) If a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any tax year in
respect of any expenditure referred to in sub-section (1), deduction shall not be
allowed for such expenditure under any other provision of this Act for the same or
any other tax year.

40

81

5

48. (1) Where an assessee is carrying on business of growing and manufacturing
tea or coffee or rubber in India, such assessee shall be allowed a deduction on the
basis of deposits into the tea development account, coffee development account or
rubber development account or any other designated account and computed as per the
provisions of the Schedule IX.

Tea development
account, coffee
development
account and
rubber
development
account.

(2) Any amount withdrawn or utilised or released at the time of closure or
otherwise shall be charged to tax in the year in which the amount is transferred or
withdrawn as per the provisions of the Schedule IX.

15

(3) Where any asset acquired as per the scheme or the deposit scheme is sold or
otherwise transferred in any tax year by the assessee to any person at any time before the
expiry of eight years from the end of the tax year in which it was acquired, such part of
the cost of such asset as is relatable to the deduction allowed under sub-section (1) shall
be deemed to be the profits and gains of business or profession of the tax year in which
the asset is sold or otherwise transferred and shall accordingly be chargeable to
income-tax as the income of that tax year.

20

49. (1) An assessee carrying on a business of prospecting, extracting, or
producing petroleum or natural gas, or both, in India, and who has an agreement with
the Central Government for this business, shall be allowed a deduction on the basis of
deposit to special account or the site restoration account, computed as per the
provisions of the Schedule X.

10

Site Restoration
Fund.

(2) Any amount withdrawn or transferred at the time of closure or otherwise
shall be charged to tax in the year in which the amount is transferred or withdrawn as
per the provisions of the Schedule X.
25

30

35

(3) Where any asset acquired as per the scheme or the deposit scheme is sold or
otherwise transferred in any tax year by the assessee to any person at any time before the
expiry of eight years from the end of the tax year in which it was acquired, such part of
the cost of such asset as is relatable to the deduction allowed under sub-section (1) shall
be deemed to be the profits and gains of business or profession of the tax year in which
the asset is sold or otherwise transferred and shall accordingly be chargeable to
income-tax as the income of that tax year.
50. (1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in this Act, if, during
the tax year, the amount received by a specified association from its members falls
short of the expenditure incurred by such association solely for the protection or
advancement of common interest of its members, then the amount so falling short
shall be allowed as deduction from the income of such association under the head
“Profits and gains of business or profession” and the remaining amount, if any, from
its income under any other head.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1),––

40

45

(a) “specified association” means any trade, professional or similar
association, not covered in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 24), whose income or its part
is not distributed to its members (other than as grants to any associations or
institutions affiliated to it);
(b) the amount received by the specified association from its members
shall include amount by way of subscription or otherwise, and shall not include
any remuneration received by the association for rendering any specific services
to such members;
(c) expenditure incurred by specified association shall not include––
(i) expenditure deductible under any other provision of this Act; and
(ii) any capital expenditure.

Special provision
in case of trade,
profession or
similar
association.

82

(3) The effect of other provisions of this Act relating to carry forward and
set off of brought forward losses or allowances shall be given before allowing
deduction under sub-section (1).
(4) The maximum allowable deduction under this section shall not exceed 50%
of the total income as computed before allowing deduction under this section.
Amortisation of
expenditure for
prospecting certain
minerals.

51. (1) An assessee, being an Indian company or a person (other than a
company) who is resident in India, who is engaged in any operations relating to
prospecting for, or extraction or production of, any mineral, shall be allowed a
deduction of an amount equal to one-tenth of the amount of expenditure referred to in
sub-section (2), in each of the relevant tax years.
(2) The expenditure referred to in sub-section (1) is the expenditure incurred by
the assessee at any time during the year of commercial production and any one or
more of the four tax years immediately preceding that year, wholly and exclusively
on any operations relating to prospecting for any mineral or group of associated
minerals specified in Part A or Part B, respectively, of the Schedule XII or on the
development of a mine or other natural deposit of any such mineral or group of
associated minerals.
(3) The expenditure under sub-section (2) shall be reduced by such expenditure
which is met directly or indirectly by any other person or authority and any sale, salvage,
compensation or insurance moneys realised by the assessee in respect of any property
or rights brought into existence as a result of the expenditure.

5

10

15

20

(4) For the purposes of sub-sections (2) and (3), the following expenditure shall be
excluded:––
(a) any expenditure on the acquisition of the site of the source of any
mineral or group of associated minerals referred to in the said sub-sections or of
any rights in or over such site; or

25

(b) any expenditure on the acquisition of the deposits of such mineral or
group of associated minerals or of any rights in or over such deposits; or
(c) any expenditure of a capital nature in respect of any building,
machinery, plant or furniture for which allowance by way of depreciation is
admissible under section 33.

30

(5) The deduction to be allowed under sub-section (1) for any relevant tax year
shall be—
(a) an amount equal to one-tenth of the expenditure specified in sub-sections (2)
and (3) (such one-tenth being herein referred to as the instalment); or
(b) such amount as is sufficient to reduce to nil the income (as computed
before making the deduction under this section) of that tax year arising from the
commercial exploitation [whether or not such commercial exploitation is as a
result of the operations or development referred to in sub-sections (2) and (3)]
of any mine or other natural deposit of the mineral or any one or more of the
minerals in a group of associated minerals under this section in respect of which
the expenditure was incurred,

35

40

whichever is less.
(6) If any part of the instalment for a relevant tax year is not fully allowed, it
shall be carried forward to the next year, becoming part of the instalment of that tax
year and such carrying forward may continue for each following year, but no
instalment shall be carried forward beyond the tenth year from the year in which
commercial production began.
(7) Where the assessee is a person other than a company or a co-operative
society, no deduction shall be admissible under sub-section (1) unless,––

45

50

83

(a) the accounts of the assessee for the year or years in which the
expenditure specified in sub-sections (2) and (3) are incurred have been audited
by an accountant, before the specified date referred to in section 63; and
5

(b) the assessee furnishes for the first year in which the deduction under
this section is claimed, the report of such audit, by such date, in such form and
duly signed and verified by such accountant, as prescribed.
(8) If an undertaking of an Indian company, entitled for deduction under
sub-section (1), is transferred before ten years specified in the said sub-section in a
scheme of amalgamation or demerger, to another Indian company, then,––

10

15

(a) no deduction shall be allowed to the amalgamating or demerged company
for the year in which such amalgamation or demerger takes place; and
(b) all the provisions of this section shall continue to apply to the
amalgamated or resulting company as it would have applied to the
amalgamating or demerged company, as if the amalgamation or demerger has
not taken place.
(9) If a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any tax year in
respect of any expenditure referred to in sub-sections (2) and (3), deduction shall not
be allowed for such expenditure under any other provision of this Act for the same or
any other tax year.

20

(10) In this section,—
(a) “operation relating to prospecting” means any operation undertaken
for the purposes of exploring, locating or proving deposits of any mineral and
includes any such operation which proves to be infructuous or abortive;

25

(b) “year of commercial production” means the tax year in which as a
result of any operation relating to prospecting, commercial production of any
mineral or any one or more of the minerals in a group of associated minerals
specified in Part A or Part B, respectively, of Schedule XII, commences;
(c) “relevant tax years” means the ten tax years beginning with the year of
commercial production.

30

52. (1) Where an expenditure of the nature specified in column B of the Table
given below is incurred during the tax year, a deduction or part thereof shall be
allowed in equal instalments in each of the tax years as mentioned in column D of the
said Table, beginning from the initial tax year specified in column C thereof.
Table

35

Sl. No.

40

A

B

C

D

1.

Expenditure incurred by
an Indian company, wholly
and exclusively for the
purposes of amalgamation
or
demerger
of
an
undertaking.

Tax year in
which
such
amalgamation or
demerger
takes
place.

Five tax years.

45

Nature of expenditure

Initial tax year

Number of tax years
over which deduction
of expenditure is
allowable in equal
instalments

Amortisation of
expenditure for
telecommunications
services,
amalgamation,
demerger, scheme
of voluntary
retirement, etc.

84

A

B

C

D

2.

Amount paid to an
employee in connection
with
his
voluntary
retirement as per any
scheme
of
voluntary
retirement.

Tax year in
which
such
payment is made.

Five tax years.

Capital
expenditure
incurred and actually paid
for acquiring any right to
use
spectrum
for
telecommunication
services (spectrum fee).

Tax year
which,—

3.

in

(a)
the
business to
operate
telecom
services is
commenced;
or

5

Number of years
commencing from
the initial tax year
and ending in the tax
year up to which the
spectrum for which
the fee is paid
remains in force.

10

15

(b) spectrum
fee is actually
paid,
whichever is later.
4.

Capital
expenditure
incurred and actually paid
for acquiring any right to
operate telecommunication
services (herein referred to
as licence fee).

Tax year
which,—

in

(a)
the
business to
operate
telecom
services is
commenced;
or

20

Number of years
commencing from
the initial tax year
and ending in the tax
year up to which the
licence for which the
fee is paid remains in
force.

25

30

(b) licence
fee is actually
paid,
whichever is later.
(2) Where the rights referred to in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 3 or 4) are
transferred and—
(a) where the proceeds of the transfer (so far as they consist of capital
sums) are less than the expenditure though incurred, but remaining unallowed,
a deduction equal to such expenditure remaining unallowed, as reduced by the
proceeds of the transfer, shall be allowed in respect of the tax year in which the
licence is transferred;
(b) where the whole or part of the right is transferred, the proceeds of the
transfer (so far as they consist of capital sums) exceed the amount of the
expenditure though incurred, but remaining unallowed, so much of the excess
as does not exceed the difference between the expenditure incurred to obtain the
licence and the amount of such expenditure remaining unallowed, shall be
chargeable to income-tax as profits and gains of the business in the tax year in
which the licence has been transferred;

35

40

45

85

(c) where the rights under clause (b) is transferred in a tax year in which
the business is no longer in existence, the provisions of this sub-section shall
apply as if the business is in existence in that tax year;
5

10

(d) where the whole or part of the right is transferred, the proceeds of the
transfer (so far as they consist of capital sums) are equal or greater than the
amount of expenditure incurred remaining unallowed, no deduction for such
expenditure shall be allowed under sub-section (1) in respect of the tax year in
which the licence is transferred or in respect of any subsequent tax year or years;
(e) such transfer is in a scheme of amalgamation or demerger to the
amalgamated company or resulting company, being an Indian company,—
(i) the provisions of clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) shall not apply to the
amalgamating or demerged company; and

15

(ii) all the provisions of this section shall continue to apply to the
amalgamated or resulting company as it would have applied to the
amalgamating or demerged company, as if the transfer has not taken place.
(3) Where a part of the rights is transferred in a tax year and sub-section (2)(b)
and (c) does not apply, the deduction to be allowed under sub-section (1) for the
expenditure incurred remaining unallowed shall be arrived at by—

20

(a) subtracting the proceeds of transfer (so far as they consist of capital
sums) from the expenditure remaining unallowed; and
(b) dividing the remainder by the number of relevant tax years which have not
expired at the beginning of the tax year during which the licence is transferred.
(4) No deduction shall be allowed––

25

(a) for depreciation under section 33(1) to (10) in respect of expenditure
mentioned in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 3 or 4), where deduction under this
section is claimed and allowed for any tax year;
(b) under any other provision of this Act in respect of the expenditure
mentioned in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 1 or 2).

30

(5) In case any deduction has been claimed and granted in respect of an
expenditure referred in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 3) and there is subsequent
failure on part of the assessee to comply with any of the provisions of this
section, then,—
(a) the deduction shall be deemed to have been wrongly allowed;

35

(b) the Assessing Officer may, irrespective of any other provisions of this
Act, recompute the total income of the assessee for the said tax year by making
necessary rectification;
(c) the provisions of section 287 shall, so far as may be, apply; and
(d) the period of four years specified in section 287(8) shall be counted
from the end of the tax year in which such failure takes place.

40

45

(6) Where a specified business reorganisation takes place before the expiry of
the period specified in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 2.D), in case of an expenditure
referred against serial number 2 thereof, then,—
(a) the provisions of this section shall continue to apply to the successor
entity for the tax year in which the business reorganisation took place and
subsequent tax years; and
(b) no deduction shall be allowed to the predecessor entity under this
section for the tax year in which such reorganisation takes place.

86

(7) In this section,––
(a) “actually paid” means the actual payment of expenditure irrespective
of the tax year in which the liability for the expenditure was incurred according
to the method of accounting regularly employed by the assessee or payable in
such manner, as prescribed;

5

(b) “equal installments” shall be calculated by taking numerator as 1 and
denominator as the tax years mentioned in column D of the Table in sub-section (1);
(c) “specified business reorgnisation” means––
(i) amalgamation of an Indian company and its undertaking with
another Indian company; or

10

(ii) demerger of an undertaking of an Indian company to another
company; or
(iii) succession of a firm or proprietorship concern to a company
fulfilling conditions as laid down in section 70(1)(zd); or
(iv) conversion of a private company or unlisted public company to a
limited liability partnership fulfilling conditions laid down in section 70(1)(ze).
Full value of
consideration for
transfer of assets
other than capital
assets in certain
cases.

53. (1) In case of transfer of an asset (other than a capital asset), being land or
building or both, if the consideration received or accrued from such transfer is less
than the stamp duty, then such stamp duty value for computing profits and gains from
transfer of such asset shall be deemed to be the full value of consideration.

15

20

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if the stamp duty value does
not exceed 110% of the consideration received or accrued and in such a case, the
consideration received or accrued shall be deemed to be the full value of
consideration.
(3) If the date of agreement fixing the value of consideration for transfer of asset
and date of registration for transfer of such asset are different, then the stamp duty
value as on date of agreement may be taken to be the full value of consideration under
sub-section (1).
(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall apply only in a case where the amount
of consideration or a part thereof has been received by specified banking or online
mode on or before the date of agreement for transfer of such asset.

25

30

(5) For the determination of the value adopted or assessed or assessable under
sub-section (1), the provisions of section 78(2) and (4) shall apply.
Business of
prospecting for
mineral oils.

54. (1) Where the assessee undertakes specified oil exploration business, then
deduction specified in sub-sections (3) and (4) shall be allowed while computing the
income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

35

(2) In this section, “specified oil exploration business” means business consisting of
prospecting for or extraction or production of mineral oils where the following conditions
are fulfilled:—
(a) the assessee has entered into an agreement with the Central Government;

40

(b) such agreement is entered for association or participation of the Central
Government or any person authorised by it; and
(c) such agreement is laid before each House of Parliament.
(3) The deduction referred to in sub-section (1) shall be––
(a) for the period before the beginning of commercial production, expenditure
towards infructuous or abortive exploration incurred in respect of any surrendered
area;

45

87

(b) for the period after the commencement of commercial production,
expenditure (whether before or after such production) in respect of drilling or
exploration activities or services or in respect of physical assets used in that
connection;
5

(c) for the tax year of commencement of commercial production and such
succeeding tax years as specified in the agreement, towards depletion of mineral oil
in the mining area.
(4) The deductions referred to in sub-section (1) shall be––

10

(a) either in lieu of, or in addition to, any allowance admissible under this Act
as specified in the agreement; and
(b) computed and made in the manner specified in the agreement and the other
provisions of this Act shall be deemed to have been modified to such extent.

15

(5) Where the business or any interest therein as referred to in sub-section (1) is
wholly or partly transferred as per the provisions of the agreement, the profit shall be
charged to tax or deduction shall be allowed in the following manner:—
(a) where A is less than C, then (C-A) shall be allowed as deduction in the tax
year in which such business or interest is transferred;
(b) where A is greater than C,––

20

(i) but less than B, then (A-C) shall be the profit chargeable under the
head “Profits and gains of business or profession” for the tax year in which
such transfer takes place;
(ii) in any other case, only (B-C) shall be the profit chargeable under the
said head for the tax year in which such transfer takes place; and

25

(iii) no deduction shall be allowed for the expenditure incurred
remaining unallowed in the tax year in which such transfer takes place or any
subsequent tax year,
where,––
A = proceeds of the transfer (so far as they consist of capital sums);

30

B = total amount of expenditure incurred in connection with the business or
to obtain interest therein;
C = amount of expenditure incurred remaining unallowed.
(6) If the business or interest therein is no longer in existence in the year of transfer,
the provisions of sub-section (5) shall apply as if such business is in existence during the
said year.

35

(7) Where the business or interest therein is transferred in a scheme of amalgamation
or demerger and the resulting entity is an Indian company, then the provisions of
sub-section (5) shall—
(a) not apply to the amalgamating or demerged company; and

40

(b) continue to apply to the amalgamated or resulting company as it would
have applied to the amalgamating or demerged company as if the transfer has
not taken place.
(8) In this section, “mineral oil” includes petroleum and natural gas.

88

Insurance business.

Special provision in
case of interest
income of specified
financial
institutions.

55. Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in the provisions of this Act
for computing income under the head “Income from house property”, “Capital gains” or
“Income from other sources”, or in section 390(5) and (6), or in sections 26 to 54, the
profits and gains of any business of insurance, including any such business carried on by
a mutual insurance company or by a co-operative society, shall be computed as per the
provisions of Schedule XIV.
56. (1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the interest
income in relation to bad or doubtful debts of a specified financial institution shall be
chargeable to tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” in the tax
year in which such interest is—

5

10

(a) credited to the profit and loss account; or
(b) actually received,
whichever is earlier.
(2) In this section,––
(a) “specified financial institution” means––

15

(i) a public financial institution; or
(ii) a scheduled bank; or
(iii) a co-operative bank, other than––
(A) a primary agricultural credit society; or
(B) a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development
bank; or

20

(iv) a State Financial Corporation; or
(v) a State Industrial Investment Corporation; or
(vi) any such class of non-banking financial companies, as notified by
the Central Government;

25

(b) “bad or doubtful debts” shall be such categories of debts, as prescribed,
having regard to the guidelines issued in relation to such debts by the Reserve Bank
of India.
Revenue
recognition for
construction and
service contracts.

57. (1) The profits and gains arising from a construction contract or a contract
for providing services shall be determined on the basis of percentage of completion
method, as per the income computation and disclosure standards notified under
section 276(2).

30

(2) The profits and gains arising from a contract for providing services under
sub-section (1) shall be determined—
(a) on the basis of project completion method, if the duration of such contract
is not more than ninety days;

35

(b) on the basis of straight line method, if the contract involves indeterminate
number of acts over a specified period of time.
(3) For the purposes of percentage of completion method, project completion
method or straight line method under this section,—
(a) the contract revenue shall include retention money;
(b) the contract costs shall not be reduced by any incidental income in the
nature of interest, dividends or capital gains.

40

89

58. (1) The provisions of sections 26 to 54, to the extent contrary to this section,
shall not apply to the specified business or profession mentioned in column B of the Table
in sub-section (2).
5

10

(2) The profits and gains of any specified business or profession as
mentioned in column B of the Table below, carried on by an assessee specified in
column C of the said Table, having total turnover or gross receipts of business or
profession during the tax year specified in column D and computed in the manner
specified in column E thereof, shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of such
business or profession chargeable to tax under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession”.
Table
Sl. No.

Specified
business or
profession

Assessee

A

B

C

D

E

1.

Any
business other
than
the
business
specified
against serial
number 2.

Eligible
assessee.

(a) Does not
exceed
₹2,00,00,000; or

(A) (i) 6% of total
turnover or gross
receipts realised in
specified banking or
online mode; and

15

20

(b) does not
exceed
₹3,00,00,000,
where
the
amount
or
aggregate
of
amounts
received,
in
cash, does not
exceed 5% of
the
total
turnover or gross
receipts.

25

30

35

40

45

50

2.

Business of
plying, hiring
or
leasing
goods
carriage.

Total turnover or
gross receipts of
business
or
profession
during tax year

An
assessee,
who
owns
not more than
ten
goods
carriages at
any
time
during the tax
year.

Manner
of
computation

(ii) 8% of total
turnover or gross
receipts realised in
any mode other than
specified banking or
online mode; or
(B) profit claimed
to have been actually
earned,
whichever is higher.
(a)
The
aggregate
of
income from goods
carriage:—
(i) being a
heavy
goods
vehicle,
calculated at the
rate of ₹1,000
per ton of gross
vehicle weight
or
unladen
weight for each
vehicle; or
(ii) being a
vehicle
other
than
heavy
goods vehicle,
calculated at the

Special provision
for computing
profits and gains
of business
profession on
presumptive basis
in case of certain
residents.

90

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
rate of ₹ 7,500
for each goods
carriage
for
every month or
part of a month
during which the
vehicle is owned
by the assessee in
the tax year; or

5

10

(b)
income
claimed to have been
actually earned,
whichever is higher.
3.

Any
profession
as referred
to in section
62(1)(a).

Specified
assessee.

(a) Does
not
exceed
₹50,00,000; or
(b) does
not
exceed
₹75,00,000,

50% of the
gross receipts or
profit claimed to have
been actually earned,
whichever
higher.

is

where
the
amount
or
aggregate
of
amounts
received in cash
does not exceed
5% of the total
turnover or gross
receipts.
(3) Any assessee mentioned in column C of the Table in sub-section (2), who
claims that––

15

20

25

30

(a) the profits or gains actually earned from the specified business or
profession are lower than the profits or gains computed in the manner
mentioned in column E of the said Table; and
(b) whose total income exceeds the maximum amount which is not
chargeable to tax,

35

shall be required to––
(i) keep and maintain such books of account and other documents as
required under section 62; and
(ii) get the accounts audited and furnish a report of such audit as required
under section 63.

40

(4) Any loss, allowance or deduction allowable under the provisions of this Act, shall
not be allowed against the income computed in the manner specified in sub-section (1).
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 2), where the assessee is a firm,
the salary and interest paid to its partners shall be deducted from the income computed
under sub-section (1) subject to the conditions and limits specified in section 35(f).

45

91

(6) The written down value of any asset used for the purposes of specified business
or profession shall be computed as if the assessee mentioned in column C of the Table in
sub-section (2) had claimed and was actually allowed depreciation thereon for each of the
relevant tax years.
5

10

15

(7) Where an eligible assessee declares profit for any tax year as per the provisions
of sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 1) and he declares profit for any of the five tax years
succeeding such tax year in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1), then he
shall not be eligible to claim the benefit of the provisions of this section for five tax years
subsequent to the tax year in which the profit has not been declared as per the provisions
of the said sub-section.
(8) Irrespective of anything contained in foregoing provision of this section, where
provisions of sub-section (7) are applicable to an eligible assessee and his total income
exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax, he shall be required
to keep and maintain such books of account and other documents as required under
section 62(2) and get them audited and furnish a report of such audit as required under
section 63.
(9) For the purposes of sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. Nos. 1 and 3), the receipt of
amount or aggregate of amounts by a cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft, which
is not account payee, shall be deemed to be the receipt in cash.

20

(10) In this section,––
(a) “eligible assessee” means an individual, a Hindu undivided family, or a
firm other than a limited liability partnership, who is resident in India, who––
(i) has not claimed any deduction under section 141; or

25

(ii) has not claimed any deduction under Chapter VIII-C for the relevant
tax year; or
(iii) does not carry on specified profession as defined in
section 62(1)(a), and (c); or
(iv) does not earn any income in the nature of commission or
brokerage; or

30

(v) does not carry on any agency business;
(b) “specified assessee” means an individual or a firm, other than a limited
liability partnership, who is a resident in India;
(c) “limited liability partnership” shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in section 2(n) of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008;

6 of 2009.
35
59 of 1988.

(d) the expressions “goods carriage”, “gross vehicle weight” and “unladen
weight” shall have the same meaning as respectively assigned to them in section 2
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988;
(e) “heavy goods vehicle” means any goods carriage, the gross vehicle weight
of which exceeds 12,000 kilograms; and

40

(f) an assessee, who is in possession of a goods carriage, whether taken on hire
purchase or on instalments and for which the whole or part of the amount payable
is still due, shall be deemed to be the owner of such goods carriage.

92
Chargeability of
royalty and fee
for technical
services in
hands of nonresidents.

59. (1) Income in the nature of royalty or fees for technical services received
by a specified assessee during a tax year, shall be charged to income-tax under the
head “Profits and gains of business or profession” under this Act, if the following
conditions are satisfied:––
(a) income is received from the Government or an Indian concern;

5

(b) income is in pursuance to an agreement made by the specified
assessee with the Government or the Indian concern;
(c) the specified assessee carries on business in India through a
permanent establishment, or performs professional services from a fixed
place of profession, situated in India; and

10

(d) the right, property or contract in respect of which the royalties or
fees for technical services are paid is effectively connected with such
permanent establishment or fixed place of profession.
(2) No deduction shall be allowed against the income chargeable under
sub-section (1) in respect of the following amounts:—

15

(a) any expenditure or allowance which is not wholly and exclusively
incurred for the business of such permanent establishment or fixed place of
profession in India; or
(b) amounts, if any, paid (otherwise than towards reimbursement of
actual expenses) by the permanent establishment to its head office or to any
of its other offices.

20

(3) The provisions of section 61 in so far as it relates to business referred to
in section 61(2) (Table: Sl. No. 5), shall not apply in respect of the income referred
to in this section.
(4) The specified assessee shall keep and maintain books of account and
other documents as per the provisions of section 62, get his accounts audited on
or before the specified date referred to in section 63 by an accountant, and furnish
report of audit in the prescribed form, duly signed and verified by the accountant.
(5) In this section, “specified assessee” means a non-resident (not being a
company) or a foreign company.
Deduction of
head office
expenditure in
case of nonresidents.

60. (1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in sections 26 to 54, in
the case of a non-resident assessee, deduction of head office expenditure incurred by
such assessee as is attributable to his business or profession in India, shall be
allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” subject to provisions of sub-section (2).

25

30

35

(2) The deduction allowable under sub-section (1) shall be restricted to—
(a) if the adjusted total income of the assessee is a loss, to an upper
monetary limit of 5% of the average adjusted total income of the assessee; or
(b) in any other case, to an upper monetary limit of 5% of the adjusted
total income of the assessee.

40

(3) In this section,—
(a) “adjusted total income” means the total income computed under this
Act, without giving effect to the allowance referred to in this section or in
section 33(11) or the deduction referred to in section 32(i)(i) or any loss
carried forward under section 112(1) or 113(2) or 115(1) or the deductions
under Chapter VIII;

45

93
(b) “average adjusted total income” means,—
(i) if the assessee is assessable for each of the three tax years
immediately preceding the relevant tax year, the arithmetic mean of
his adjusted total income over those three tax years;
(ii) if the assessee is assessable only for two of the said three tax
years, the arithmetic mean of his adjusted total income over those two
tax years;

5

(iii) if the assessee is assessable only for one of the said three tax
years, his adjusted total income for that tax year;
(c) “head office expenditure” means executive and general administration
expenditure incurred by the assessee outside India, including expenditure
incurred in respect of—

10

(i) rent, rates, taxes, repairs or insurance of any premises outside
India used for the business or profession;
(ii) salary, wages, annuity, pension, fees, bonus, commission,
gratuity, perquisites or profits in lieu of, or in addition to, salary,
whether paid or allowed to any employee or other person employed
in, or managing the affairs of, any office outside India;

15

(iii) travelling by any employee or other person employed in, or
managing the affairs of, any office outside India; and

20

(iv) such other matters connected with executive and general
administration, as prescribed.

25

61. (1) The provisions of sections 26 to 54, to the extent contrary to this
section, shall not apply to the specified business mentioned in column B of the
Table in sub-section (2).

30

(2) The profits and gains of any specified business as mentioned in
column B of the Table below, carried on by a specified assessee as mentioned
in column C of the said Table during a tax year, shall be computed in the manner
specified in column D thereof, and charged to income-tax for the said tax year
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
Table
Sl No.

35

40

45

Specified business

A

B

1.

Business
of
operation of ships,
other than cruise ships
referred to in Serial
number 2.

Specified
assessee

Profits and gains of
business or profession

C
Nonresident.

D
7.5% of (A+B),
where,––
A = sum on account of
carriage
of
passenger,
livestock, mail or goods
shipped at any port in India,
whether paid or payable, in
or outside India, to the
assessee or any other person
on his behalf (including
demurrage, handling or other
similar charges);

Special
provision for
computation of
income on
presumptive
basis in respect
of certain
business
activities of
certain nonresidents.

94

A

B

C

D
B = sum on account of
carriage
of
passenger,
livestock, mail or goods
shipped at any port outside
India, whether received or
deemed to be received in
India, by the assessee or any
other person on his behalf
(including
demurrage,
handling or other similar
charges).

2.

Business
of
operation of cruise
ships (subject to
the conditions as
prescribed).

Non-resident.

Business
operation
aircraft.

of
of

where,––
A = sum on account of
carriage of passenger, paid or
payable to the assessee or any
other person on his behalf;

Non-resident.

5% of (A+B),

Business of civil
construction
or
erection or testing
or commissioning,
of
plant
or
machinery,
in
connection with a
turnkey
power
project, approved
by the Central
Government.

15

20

25

where,––
A = sum on account of
carriage
of
passenger,
livestock, mail or goods
from any place in India, paid
or payable (in or outside
India) to the assessee or any
other person on his behalf;
B = sum on account of
carriage
of
passenger,
livestock, mail or goods
from any place outside India,
received or deemed to be
received in India, by the
assessee or any other person
on his behalf.

4.

10

20% of (A+B),

B = sum on account of
carriage
of
passenger
received or deemed to be
received by the assessee or
any other person on his
behalf.
3.

5

Foreign
company.

10% of the amount
towards
such
civil
construction,
erection,
testing, or commissioning,
paid or payable, to the
assessee or to any other
person on his behalf,
whether in or outside India.

30

35

40

45

50

95
A

B

C

5.

Business
of
providing services
or
facilities
(including supply
of
plant
and
machinery on hire)
for prospecting,
extraction
or
production
of
mineral oils.

Non-resident
person.

5

10

25

6.

40

45

where,––

B = sum on account of
business of providing services
and facilities in connection
with, or supply of plant and
machinery on hire used, or to be
used, in the prospecting for, or
extraction or production of
mineral oils outside India,
received or deemed to be
received in India, by the
assessee or any other person on
his behalf.

20

35

10% of (A+B),

A = sum on account of
business of providing services
and facilities in connection
with, or supply of plant and
machinery on hire used, or to be
used, in the prospecting for, or
extraction or production of
mineral oils in India, paid or
payable (in or outside India), to
the assessee or any other person
on his behalf;

15

30

D

Business
of
providing services
or technology in
India, for the
purposes of setting
up an electronics
manufacturing
facility
or
in
connection with
manufacturing or
producing
electronic goods,
article or thing in
India to a resident
company.

Nonresident.

25% of (A+B),
where,––
A = the amount paid or
payable to the non-resident
assessee or to any person on his
behalf on account of providing
services or technology;
B = the amount received or
deemed to be received by the
non-resident assessee or on
behalf of non-resident assessee
on account of providing
services or technology.

(3) For the purposes of (Table: Sl. Nos. 1 to 5) of sub-section (2), the
specified assessee may claim that the profits actually earned from the specified
business are lower than the business profits computed under sub-section (2),
if,––
(a) he keeps and maintains such books of account and other documents
as required under section 62; and

50

(b) gets his accounts audited and furnish a report of such audit as
required under section 63.
(4) Any loss, allowance or deduction allowable under the provisions of this
Act shall not be allowed against the income computed in the manner specified in
sub-section (2).

96
(5) The written down value of any asset used for the purposes of specified
business or profession shall be computed, as if the assessee mentioned in
column C of the Table in sub-section (2) had claimed and was actually allowed
depreciation thereon for each of the relevant tax years.
(6) For the purposes of sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 5) the provisions of
this section shall not apply where the provisions of section 54 or 59 or 207 or 527
apply for the purposes of computing profits and gains or any other income referred
to in the said sections.
(7) In this section, “plant” includes ships, aircrafts, vehicles, drilling units,
scientific apparatuses and equipments, used for the purposes of the specified
business as mentioned in sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 5).

5

10

(8) For the purposes of sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 6), resident company
shall satisfy the following:—
(a) it is establishing or operating electronics manufacturing facility or
a connected facility for manufacturing or producing electronic goods, article
or thing in India, under a scheme notified by the Central Government in the
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology; and

15

(b) it satisfies the conditions prescribed in this behalf.
Maintenance of
books of
account.

62. (1) (a) Any person carrying on specified profession; or
(b) any person carrying on, business; or any profession [not being a
profession referred to in clause (a)] and satisfying the conditions referred to in
sub-section (2); or

20

(c) any other person carrying on profession notified by the Board in this behalf,
shall keep and maintain such books of account and other documents to enable the
Assessing Officer to compute his total income under this Act.

25

(2) The conditions in respect of persons referred to in sub-section (1)(b) shall
be the following:––
(a) where the income from business or profession exceeds one lakh and
twenty thousand rupees or its total sales, turnover or gross receipts from such
business or profession exceeds ten lakh rupees in any one of the three years
immediately preceding the tax year; or
(b) where business or profession is newly set up in the tax year, the
income from business or profession is likely to exceed one lakh and twenty
thousand rupees or its total sales, turnover or gross receipts from such business
or profession is likely to exceed ten lakh rupees during such tax year; or

30

35

(c) where during the tax year, the assessee, other than the assessee referred
to in section 61(2) (Table: Sl. No. 6), has claimed income from business or
profession to be lower than the deemed profits as referred to in section 58(2) or
section 61(2); or
(d) in case of an individual or Hindu undivided family, clauses (a) and
(b) shall be modified to the extent of income from such business or
profession exceeding two lakh and fifty thousand rupees and its total sales,
turnover or gross receipts from such business or profession exceeding two
lakh and fifty thousand rupees.

40

(3) For the purposes of this section, the Board may prescribe––

45

(a) the books of account and other documents (including inventories,
wherever necessary) to be kept and maintained;
(b) particulars to be contained therein;
(c) the form, manner and place at which they shall be kept and
maintained; and

50

97
(d) the period for which such books of account and other documents
are to be retained.
(4) In this section, “specified profession” means––
(a) legal, medical, engineering, architectural, accountancy, technical
consultancy, interior decoration, information technology or company
secretary; or

5

(b) any other profession, as notified by the Board.

10

63. (1) Every person, carrying on the business or profession fulfilling the
conditions specified in column B of the Table below, shall get his accounts of the
tax year audited by an accountant, before the specified date.

Tax audit.

Table
Sl. No.

15

Conditions for getting books of account audited

A

B

1.

Where the total sales, turnover or gross receipts from business or
profession during the tax year of any person who––
(a) is carrying on business and at least 95% of aggregate of all
the receipts and payments from the business during the tax year are
through specified banking or online mode, is more than
₹10,00,00,000;
(b) is carrying on business and not covered under serial number
1, is more than ₹1,00,00,000;

20

(c) is carrying on profession, is more than ₹50,00,000.
2.
25

If the person is carrying on business or profession, referred to in
section 58(2) or 61(2) (other than that referred to in section 61(2)
[Table: Sl. No. 6]) and the profits and gains from such business or
profession are claimed to be lower than the deemed profits as
referred to in these sections.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply,––

30

(a) where profits and gains of business or profession, declared by the
assessee are as per section 58(2);
(b) where the person, other than that referred in section 61(2)
(Table: Sl. No. 6), is deriving income of the nature referred to in section 61(2).

35

(3) The assessee shall furnish by the specified date, the report of such audit
in such form, duly signed and verified by the accountant and setting forth such
particulars, as prescribed.
(4) Where a person is required, by or under any other law, to get his accounts
audited, then it shall be sufficient compliance of this section, if such person––
(a) gets the accounts of such business or profession audited under such
law before the specified date; and

40

(b) furnishes by that specified date the report of such audit along with
the report of the accountant in the form as prescribed.
(5) In this section, “specified date” in relation to the accounts of the assessee
of the tax year, means the date one month prior to the due date for furnishing the
return of income under section 263(1).

45

64. Any person carrying on business with total sales, turnover, or gross
receipts exceeding fifty crore rupees in the preceding tax year shall provide
facility for accepting payments through prescribed electronic methods, in addition
to any other electronic payment methods, already offered.

Facilitating
payments in
electronic
modes.

98
Special
provision for
computing
deductions in
case of business
reorganisation
of co-operative
banks.

65. (1) The deduction under section 33 or 44 or 52(1) (Table: Sl. No. 1 or 2)
shall, in a case where business reorganisation of a co-operative bank has taken
place during the tax year, be allowed as per provisions of this section.
(2) The amount of deduction allowable to the predecessor co-operative bank
or to the successor co-operative bank or to the converted banking company under
section 33 or 44 or 52(1) (Table: Sl. No. 1 or 2) shall be determined as per the
formula—

5

(i) for predecessor co-operative bank:—
A×B
C

10

(ii) for successor co-operative bank or converted banking company:—
A×D
C
where,—
A = the amount of deduction allowable to the predecessor
co-operative bank, if the business reorganisation had not taken place;

15

B = the number of days comprised in the period beginning with the 1st
day of the tax year and ending on the day immediately preceding the date of
business reorganisation; and
C = the total number of days in the tax year in which the business
reorganisation has taken place.

20

D = the number of days comprised in the period beginning with the
date of business reorganisation and ending on the last day of the tax year.
(3) The provisions of section 44 or 52(1) (Table: Sl. No. 1 or 2) shall, in a case
where an undertaking of the predecessor co-operative bank entitled to the
deduction under the said section is transferred before the expiry of the period
specified therein to a successor co-operative bank or to a converted banking
company on account of business reorganisation, apply to the successor
co-operative bank or to the converted banking company in the tax years
subsequent to the year of business reorganisation as they would have applied to
the predecessor co-operative bank, as if the business reorganisation had not taken
place.

25

30

(4) In this section,––
(a) “amalgamation” means the merger of an amalgamating
co-operative bank with an amalgamated co-operative bank, if—
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the amalgamating co-operative
bank or banks immediately before the merger (other than the assets
transferred, by sale or distribution on winding up, to the amalgamated
co-operative bank) become the assets and liabilities of the
amalgamated co-operative bank;

35

(ii) the members holding 75% or more voting rights in the
amalgamating co-operative bank become members of the
amalgamated co-operative bank; and

40

(iii) the shareholders holding 75% or more in value of the shares
in the amalgamating co-operative bank (other than the shares held by

99
the amalgamated co-operative bank or its nominee or its subsidiary,
immediately before the merger) become shareholders of the
amalgamated co-operative bank;
(b) “amalgamating co-operative bank” means—
5

(i) a co-operative bank which merges with another co-operative
bank; or
(ii) every co-operative bank merging to form a new co-operative
bank;
(c) “amalgamated co-operative bank” means—

10

(i) a co-operative bank with which one or more
amalgamating co-operative banks merge; or
(ii) a co-operative bank formed as a result of merger of
two or more amalgamating co-operative banks;

15

20

(d) “business reorganisation” means reorganisation of business
involving the amalgamation or demerger of a co-operative bank or
conversion of a primary co-operative bank;
(e) “conversion” means transition of a primary co-operative bank to a
banking company under the scheme of the Reserve Bank of India as notified
vide its circular number DCBR. CO. LS. PCB. Cir. No. 5/07.01.000/2018-19,
dated 27th September, 2018;
(f) “converted banking company” means a banking company formed
as a result of conversion from primary co-operative bank;

25

(g) “demerger” means the transfer by a demerged co-operative bank
of one or more of its undertakings to any resulting co-operative bank, in
such manner that—
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the undertaking or undertakings
immediately before the transfer become the assets and liabilities of the
resulting co-operative bank;

30

35

40

(ii) the assets and the liabilities are transferred to the resulting
co-operative bank at values (other than change in the value of assets
consequent to their revaluation) appearing in its books of account
immediately before the transfer;
(iii) the resulting co-operative bank issues, in consideration of
the transfer, its membership to the members of the demerged cooperative bank on a proportionate basis;
(iv) the shareholders holding 75% or more in value of the shares
in the demerged co-operative bank (other than shares already held by
the resulting bank or its nominee or its subsidiary immediately before
the transfer), become shareholders of the resulting cooperative bank,
otherwise than as a result of the acquisition of the assets of the
demerged cooperative bank or any undertaking thereof by the resulting
co-operative bank;
(v) the transfer of the undertaking is on a going concern
basis; and

45

(vi) the transfer is as per the conditions specified by the Central
Government, by notification, having regard to the necessity to ensure
that the transfer is for genuine business purposes;

100
(h) “demerged co-operative bank” means the co-operative bank whose
undertaking is transferred, pursuant to a demerger, to a resulting bank;
(i) “predecessor co-operative bank” means the amalgamating
co-operative bank or the demerged co-operative bank, or the primary
co-operative bank, which has been succeeded as a result of conversion;

5

(j) “resulting co-operative bank” means—
(i) one or more co-operative banks to which the undertaking of
the demerged co-operative bank is transferred in a demerger; or
(ii) any co-operative bank formed as a result of demerger;
(k) “successor co-operative bank” means the amalgamated
co-operative bank or the resulting bank.
Interpretation.

10

66. In sections 26 to 66,—
(1) “agreement”, for the purposes of section 26(2)(h), includes any
arrangement or understanding or action in concert,—
(A) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is
formal or in writing; or

15

(B) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is
intended to be enforceable by legal proceedings;
(2) “banking company” means a company to which the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 applies and includes any bank or banking institution
referred to in section 51 of that Act;

20 10 of 1949.

(3) “commission or brokerage” shall have the meaning assigned to it
in section 402(7);
(4) “commodity derivative” shall have the same meaning as assigned
to it in Chapter VII of the Finance Act, 2013;

25 17 of 2013.

(5) “commodities transaction tax” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it under Chapter VII of the Finance Act, 2013;

17 of 2013.

(6) “fees for technical services” shall have the meaning assigned to it
in section 9(7)(b);
(7) “housing finance company” means a public company formed or
registered in India with the main object of carrying on the business of
providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in India
for residential purposes;
(8) “Indian Institute of Technology” shall have the same meaning as that
of “Institute” defined in section 3(g) of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961;

30

35 59 of 1961.

(9) “Keyman insurance policy” shall have the meaning assigned to it
in Schedule II (Note 1);
(10) “limited liability partnership” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 2(1)(n) of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008;
(11) “long-term finance”, for the purposes of section 32(e), means any
loan or advance where the terms under which moneys are loaned or advanced
provide for repayment along with interest thereof during a period of not less
than five years;
(12) “micro enterprise” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 2(h) of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
Act, 2006;

6 of 2009.
40

45

27 of 2006.

101
(13) “mineral oil” includes petroleum and natural gas;
(14) “moneys payable” in respect of any tangible asset includes—
(a) any insurance, salvage or compensation moneys payable in
respect thereof;
5

(b) where the asset is sold, the price for which it is sold;
(15) “National Housing Bank” means the National Housing Bank
established under section 3 of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987;

53 of 1987.

10 of 1949.
10

(16) “non-scheduled bank” means a banking company as defined in
section 5(c) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, which is not a scheduled
bank;
(17) “paid” means, except for section 37, actually paid or incurred
according to the method of accounting upon the basis of which the profits or
gains are computed under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”;

15

(18) “permanent establishment” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 173(c);
(19) “plant” includes ships, vehicles, books, scientific apparatus and
surgical equipment used for the business or profession but does not include
tea bushes or livestock or buildings or furniture and fittings;

20

(20) “predecessor entity” means––
(a) the amalgamating Indian company in the case of
amalgamation;
(b) the demerged Indian company, in the case of demerger;

25

(c) a firm, in the case of a succession of a firm by a company as
referred to in section 70(1)(zd);
(d) a private company or unlisted public company, in case of
conversion as referred to in section 70(1)(ze);
(e) a sole proprietary concern, in the case of succession of sole
proprietorship concern by a company, as referred to in section 70(1)(zf);

30
10 of 1949.

35

(21) “primary agricultural credit society” shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(22) “primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank”
means a society having its area of operation confined to a taluk and the
principal object of which is to provide for long-term credit for agricultural
and rural development activities;
(23) “professional services” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 402(28);
(24) “public company” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in section 2(71) of the Companies Act, 2013;

18 of 2013.
40
18 of 2013.

(25) “public financial institution” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 2(72) of the Companies Act, 2013;
(26) “rate of exchange” means the rate of exchange determined or
recognised by the Central Government for the conversion of Indian currency
into foreign currency or foreign currency into Indian currency;

102
(27) “recognised commodity exchange" means a recognised
association as defined in section 2(j) of the Forward Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1952 and which fulfils such conditions, as prescribed, and is notified
by the Central Government for this purpose;
(28) “rent”, for the purposes of section 35(b)(i), shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 402(29);

17 of 1952.

5

(29) “royalty” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 9(6)(b);
(30) “rural branch” means a branch of a scheduled bank or a
non-scheduled bank situated in a place which has a population of not more
than ten thousand according to the last preceding census, of which the
relevant figures have been published before the first day of the tax year;

10

(31) “scientific research” means—
(a) any activity for the extension of knowledge in the fields of
natural or applied science including agriculture, animal husbandry or
fisheries; and
(b) the references to expenditure incurred on scientific research
shall include all expenditure incurred for the prosecution, or the
provision of facilities for the prosecution, of scientific research, but
does not include any expenditure incurred in the acquisition of rights
in, or arising out of, scientific research,

15

20

and the references to scientific research related to a business or class of
business shall include any scientific research—
(i) which may lead to or facilitate an extension of that business
or, all businesses of that class;

25

(ii) of a medical nature which has a special relation to the welfare
of workers employed in that business or, all businesses of that class;
(32) “securities transaction tax” shall have the meaning assigned to it
under Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004;
(33) “service”, for the purposes of section 26(2)(h), means a service of
any description which is made available to potential users and includes the
provision of services in connection with business of any industrial or
commercial nature such as––

23 of 2004.
30

(a) accounting;
(b) banking;

35

(c) communication;
(d) conveying of news or information;
(e) advertising;
(f) entertainment;
(g) amusement;
(h) education;
(i) financing;
(j) insurance;
(k) chit funds;

40

103
(l) real estate;
(m) construction;
(n) transport;
(o) storage;
5

(p) processing;
(q) supply of electrical or other energy; and
(r) boarding and lodging;

27 of 2006.

10

(34) “small enterprise” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in section 2(m) of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
Act, 2006;
(35) “speculative transaction” means a transaction in which a contract
for the purchase or sale of any commodity, including stocks and shares, is
periodically or ultimately settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or
transfer of the commodity or scrips, other than the following transactions:—

15

20

(a) a specified derivative transaction as defined in clause (37);
(b) a contract in respect of raw materials or merchandise entered
into by a person in the course of his manufacturing or merchandising
business to guard against loss through future price fluctuations in
respect of his contracts for actual delivery of goods manufactured, or
merchandise sold by him;
(c) a contract in respect of stocks and shares entered into by a
dealer or investor therein to guard against loss in his holdings of stocks
and shares through price fluctuations;

25

30

(d) a contract entered into by a member of a forward market or a
stock exchange in the course of any transaction in the nature of jobbing
or arbitrage, to guard against loss which may arise in the ordinary
course of his business as such member;
(36) “Specified Banking or Online Mode” shall mean transaction by
an account payee cheque or an account payee bank draft or use of electronic
clearing system through a bank account or through such other electronic
mode, as prescribed;
(37) “specified derivative transaction” means any transaction in
derivatives, if—

35

(a) it is carried out electronically on screen-based systems of a
recognised stock exchange or a recognised commodity exchange;
(b) it is carried out by a bank or mutual fund or any other person,
through a broker, member or such other intermediary; and
(c) it is supported by a time stamped contract note issued by the
intermediary to every client indicating in the contract note—

40

(i) the unique client identity number allotted under any law
in force; and
(ii) the Permanent Account Number allotted under this Act;
(38) “State Government undertaking” includes—
(a) a corporation established by or under any State Act;

45

(b) a company in which more than 50% of the paid-up equity
share capital is held by the State Government;

104
(c) a company in which more than 50% of the paid-up equity
share capital is held by the entity referred to in clause (a) or (b)
(whether singly or taken together);
(d) a company or corporation in which the State Government has
the right to appoint the majority of the directors or to control the
management or policy decisions, directly or indirectly, including by
virtue of its shareholding or management rights or shareholders
agreements or voting agreements or in any other manner;
(e) an authority, a board or an institution or a body established
or constituted by or under any State Act, or owned or controlled by the
State Government;
(39) “State Industrial Investment Corporation” means a Government
company within the meaning of section 2(45) of the Companies Act, 2013,
engaged in the business of providing long-term finance for industrial
projects;

5

10

18 of 2013.
15

(40) “State Financial Corporation” means a Financial Corporation
established under section 3 or 3A or an institution notified under section 46
of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951;

63 of 1951.

(41) “successor entity” means––
(a) the amalgamated Indian company, in the case of
amalgamation;

20

(b) the resulting Indian company, in the case of demerger;
(c) a company, in case of a succession of a firm by a company
as referred to in section 70(1)(zd);
(d) a limited liability partnership, in case of conversion of private
company or unlisted public company to a limited liability partnership,
as referred to in section 70(1)(ze);

25

(e) company, in case of succession of sole proprietorship
concern by a company, as referred to in section 70(1)(zf);
(42) “taxable commodities transaction” shall have the meaning
assigned to it under Chapter VII of the Finance Act, 2013;

30
17 of 2013.

(43) “taxable securities transaction” shall have the meaning assigned
to it under Chapter VII of the Finance Act, 2004;
(44) “University” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 70(2) (Table: Sl. No. 7); and

13 of 2004.
35

(45) “work”, for the purposes of section 35(b)(i), shall have the
meaning assigned to it in section 402(47).
E.—Capital gains
Capital gains.

67. (1) Any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset
effected in a tax year shall, save as otherwise provided in sections 82, 83, 84, 86,
87, 88 and 89, be chargeable to income-tax under the head “Capital gains” and
shall be deemed to be the income of the tax year in which the transfer took place.
(2) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), if a person receives
during any tax year any money or other assets under an insurance from an insurer
on account of damage to, or destruction of, any capital asset, as a result of
circumstances mentioned in sub-section (3), then,––
(a) any profits or gains arising from receipt of such money or other
assets shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head “Capital gains” and
shall be deemed to be the income of such person of the tax year in which
such money or other asset was received; and

40

45

50

105

(b) for the purposes of section 72, the value of any money or the fair
market value of other assets on the date of such receipt shall be deemed to be
the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the
transfer of such capital asset.
5

(3) The following shall be the circumstances referred to in sub-section (2):––
(a) flood, typhoon, hurricane, cyclone, earthquake or any other
convulsion of nature; or
(b) riot or civil disturbance; or
(c) accidental fire or explosion; or

10

(d) action by an enemy or action taken in combating an enemy (whether
with or without a declaration of war).
(4) In sub-section (2), “insurer” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in section 2(9) of the Insurance Act, 1938.

4 of 1938.

15

20

(5) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), if any profits or gains
arises to a person from receipt of any amount, including a bonus, under a unit linked
insurance policy to which the exemption specified at Schedule II (Table: Sl. No. 2)
does not apply, then,––
(a) such profits and gains shall be chargeable to income-tax under the
head “Capital gains” and shall be deemed to be the income of such person in
the tax year in which such amount was received; and
(b) the income taxable shall be calculated in such manner, as prescribed.
(6) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), if the profits or gains
arising from the transfer by way of conversion of a capital asset into, or its treatment
by the owner as, stock-in-trade of a business carried on by him, then,––

25

30

(a) such profits and gains shall be chargeable to income-tax as his
income in the tax year in which such stock-in-trade is sold (or otherwise
transferred by any other means); and
(b) for the purposes of section 72, the fair market value of the asset on
the date of such conversion or treatment shall be deemed to be the full value
of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of such
capital asset.
(7) If any person, at any time during the tax year, had any beneficial interest
in any securities and any profits or gains arise from transfer made by the depository
or participant of such beneficial interest in respect of securities, then,––

35

22 of 1996.

40

(a) such profits and gains shall be chargeable to income-tax as the
income of the beneficial owner of the tax year in which such transfer took
place;
(b) such profits and gains shall not be regarded as income of the
depository who is deemed to be the registered owner of securities by virtue of
section 10(1) of the Depositories Act, 1996; and
(c) for the purposes of section 72 and section 2(100)(b), the cost of
acquisition and the period of holding of any securities shall be determined on
the basis of the first-in-first-out method.

106
(8) In sub-section (7), “beneficial owner”, “depository” and “security” shall
have the same meanings as respectively assigned to them in section 2(1)(a), (e) and
(l) of the Depositories Act, 1996.
(9) If any profits or gains arise from the transfer of a capital asset by a person,
to a firm or other association of persons or body of individuals (not being a company
or co-operative society) in which he is or becomes a partner or member, by way of
capital contribution or otherwise, then,––

22 of 1996.

5

(a) such profits and gains shall be chargeable to tax as his income in the
tax year of such transfer; and
(b) for the purposes of section 72 the amount recorded in the books of
account of the firm, association or body as the value of the capital asset shall
be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a
result of the transfer of such capital asset.
(10) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), if a specified
person receives during the tax year, any money or capital asset, or both, from a
specified entity in connection with the reconstitution of such specified
entity, then,––
(a) any profits or gains arising from such receipt shall be deemed as
income of the specified entity of the tax year of such receipt by the specified
person and chargeable to income-tax under the head “Capital gains”; and

10

15

20

(b) such profits or gains shall be determined irrespective of anything to
the contrary contained in this Act as follows:—
A = B + C – D,
where,
A = income chargeable to income-tax under this sub-section as
income of the specified entity under the head “Capital gains”;

25

B = value of any money received by the specified person from the
specified entity on the date of such receipt;
C = amount of fair market value of the capital asset received by the
specified person from the specified entity on the date of such
receipt; and

30

D = amount of balance in the capital account (represented in any
manner) of the specified person in the books of account of the specified
entity at the time of its reconstitution;
(c) for the purposes of the formula in clause (b),––

35

(i) if the value of “A” in the said formula is negative, its value shall
be deemed to be zero;
(ii) the balance in the capital account of the specified person in the
books of account of the specified entity shall be calculated without
considering any increase in the capital account of the specified person
due to revaluation of any asset or due to self-generated goodwill or any
other self-generated asset; and

40

107

5

(d) the provisions of this sub-section shall operate in addition to the
provisions of section 8 and the taxation under the said section shall be
worked out independently, when a capital asset is received by a specified
person from a specified entity in connection with the reconstitution of such
specified entity.
(11) In sub-section (10),—
(a) “reconstitution of the specified entity”, “specified entity” and
“specified person” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
section 8;

10

15

20

25

30

(b) “self-generated goodwill” and “self-generated asset” mean goodwill
or asset, as the case may be, which has been acquired without incurring any
cost for purchase or which has been generated during the course of the
business or profession.
(12) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), if the capital gain
arises from the transfer of a capital asset by way of compulsory acquisition under
any law, or a transfer the consideration for which was determined or approved by
the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of India, and the compensation or the
consideration for such transfer is enhanced or further enhanced by any court,
tribunal or other authority, the capital gain shall be dealt with in the following
manner:––
(a) the capital gains computed with reference to the compensation
awarded in the first instance or as the case may be, consideration determined
or approved by the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of India in the
first instance, shall be chargeable as income under the head “Capital gains” of
the tax year in which such compensation or part thereof, or such consideration
or part thereof, was first received;
(b) the amount by which the compensation or consideration is enhanced
or further enhanced by the court, tribunal or other authority shall be deemed
to be income chargeable under the head “Capital gains” of the tax year in
which such amount is received;
(c) any compensation as referred to in clause (b) received in pursuance
of an interim order of a court, tribunal or other authority shall be deemed as
income chargeable under the head “Capital gains” of the tax year in which the
final order of such court, tribunal or other authority is made; and

35

(d) the capital gain assessed for any tax year under clause (a) or (b)
shall be recomputed where the compensation or consideration referred to
in clauses (a) to (c) is reduced by any court, tribunal or other authority
and such reduced value shall be taken to be the full value of the
consideration.

40

(13) In relation to the amount referred to in sub-section (12)(b) and (c),—
(a) the cost of acquisition and the cost of improvement shall be taken as
nil; and

45

(b) in a case, where the enhanced compensation or consideration is
received by any other person due to the death of the person who made the
transfer, or for any other reason, such amount shall be deemed as the income
chargeable to tax under the head “Capital gains” in the hands of such other
person.

108

(14) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), if the capital gains
arises to a person (being an individual or a Hindu undivided family), from the
transfer of a capital asset, being land or building or both, under a specified
agreement, then,––
(a) such capital gains shall be chargeable to income-tax for the tax year
in which the certificate of completion for the whole or part of the project is
issued by the competent authority; and
(b) for the purposes of section 72, the stamp duty value, on the date of
issue of the said certificate, of the share of such person, being land or building,
or both, in the project, as increased by any consideration received in cash or
by a cheque or draft or by any other mode shall be deemed to be the full value
of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of such
capital asset.

5

10

(15) In sub-section (14),––
(a) “competent authority” means the authority empowered to approve
the building plan under any law;
(b) “specified agreement” means a registered agreement in which a
person owning land or building, or both, agrees to allow another person to
develop a real estate project on such land or building, or both, in consideration
of a share, being land or building, or both, in such project, whether with or
without payment of part of the consideration in cash.

15

20

(16) The provisions of sub-section (14) shall not apply, if the person transfers
his share in the project on or before the date of issue of the certificate of completion,
and then,––
(a) the capital gains shall be deemed to be the income of the tax year of
such transfer; and

25

(b) the provisions of this Act, other than sub-section (14), shall apply for
the purpose of determination of full value of consideration.
(17) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), the difference
between the repurchase price of the units referred to in section 80CCB(2) of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 and the capital value of such units shall be taxed considering
it to be the capital gains arising to the assessee in the tax year in which––

30
43 of 1961.

(a) such repurchase takes place; or
(b) the plan referred to in that section is terminated.
(18) For the purposes of sub-section (17), “capital value of such units” means
any amount invested by the assessee in the units referred to in section 80CCB(2) of
the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Capital gains on
distribution of
assets by
companies in
liquidation.

68. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 67, where the assets
of a company are distributed to its shareholders on its liquidation, such
distribution shall not be regarded as a transfer by the company for the purposes
of the said section.

35
43 of 1961.

40

(2) If a shareholder, on the liquidation of a company, receives any money or
other assets from the company, then,––
(a) such shareholder shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head
“Capital gains”, in respect of the money so received or the market value of the
other assets on the date of distribution, as reduced by the amount assessed as
dividend within the meaning of section 2(40)(c); and
(b) the sum so arrived at shall be deemed to be the full value of the
consideration for the purposes of section 72.

45

109

5

10

69. (1) If a shareholder or a holder of other specified securities receives any
consideration from any company for the purchase of its own shares or other
specified securities held by such shareholder or holder of other specified securities,
then, subject to the provisions of section 72, the difference between the cost of
acquisition and the value of consideration so received shall be deemed to be the
“Capital gains” arising to such shareholder or the holder in the year in which the
company purchases the shares or other specified securities.

Capital gains on
purchase by
company of its
own shares or
other specified
securities.

(2) If the shareholder receives any consideration of the nature referred to in
section 2(40)(f), from any company in respect of buy-back of shares, then for the
purposes of this section, the value of such consideration shall be deemed to be nil.
(3) For the purposes of this section, “specified securities” shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it in Explanation 1 to section 68 of the Companies Act, 2013.

18 of 2013.

70. (1) The provisions of section 67 shall not apply to transfer—
15

(a) of distribution of capital assets on the total or partial partition of a
Hindu undivided family;
(b) of a capital asset by an individual or a Hindu undivided family, under
a will or a gift or an irrevocable trust;
(c) of a capital asset, not being stock-in-trade, by a company to its
subsidiary company, if—

20

(i) the parent company or its nominees hold the whole of the share
capital of the subsidiary company; and
(ii) the subsidiary company is an Indian company;
(d) of a capital asset, not being stock-in-trade, by a subsidiary company
to the holding company, if––

25

(i) the whole of the share capital of the subsidiary company is held
by the holding company; and
(ii) the holding company is an Indian company;

30

(e) in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital asset by the amalgamating
company to the amalgamated company, if the amalgamated company is an
Indian company;
(f) by a shareholder, in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital asset
being a share or shares held in the amalgamating company, if—

35

(i) the transfer is made in consideration of allotment of any share
or shares in the amalgamated company, except when the shareholder
itself is the amalgamated company; and
(ii) the amalgamated company is an Indian company;
(g) in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital asset being a share or
shares held in an Indian company, by the amalgamating foreign company to
the amalgamated foreign company, if—

40

(i) at least 25% of the shareholders of the amalgamating foreign
company continue to remain shareholders of the amalgamated foreign
company; and
(ii) such transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country,
in which the amalgamating company is incorporated;

Transactions not
regarded as
transfer.

110

(h) in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital asset, being a share of a
foreign company, referred to in section 9(9)(a), which derives directly or
indirectly, its value substantially from the share or shares of an Indian
company, held by the amalgamating foreign company to the amalgamated
foreign company, if—

5

(i) at least 25% of the shareholders of the amalgamating foreign
company continue to remain shareholders of the amalgamated foreign
company; and
(ii) such transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country
in which the amalgamating company is incorporated;

10

(i) of a capital asset by a banking company to a banking institution under
a scheme of amalgamation sanctioned and brought into force by the Central
Government under section 45(7) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(j) in a demerger, of a capital asset by the demerged company to the
resulting company, if the resulting company is an Indian company;

10 of 1949.

15

(k) of shares by the resulting company or issue of shares by such
company, in a scheme of demerger to the shareholders of the demerged
company, if the transfer or issue is made in consideration of demerger of the
undertaking;
(l) in a demerger (where the provisions of sections 230 to 232 of the
Companies Act, 2013 do not apply), of a capital asset, being a share or shares
held in an Indian company, by the demerged foreign company to the resulting
foreign company, if—
(i) the shareholders holding not less than 75% in value of the shares
of the demerged foreign company continue to remain shareholders of the
resulting foreign company; and

20
18 of 2013.

25

(ii) such transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country,
in which the demerged foreign company is incorporated;
(m) in a demerger (where the provisions of sections 230 to 232 of the
Companies Act, 2013 do not apply), of a capital asset, being a share of a
foreign company, referred to in section 9(9)(a), which derives directly or
indirectly, its value substantially from the share or shares of an Indian
company, held by the demerged foreign company to the resulting foreign
company, if—
(i) the shareholders, holding not less than 75% in value of the
shares of the demerged foreign company, continue to remain
shareholders of the resulting foreign company; and

30 18 of 2013.

35

(ii) such transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country
in which the demerged foreign company is incorporated;
(n) in a business reorganisation, of a capital asset by the predecessor
co-operative bank to the successor co-operative bank or to the converted
banking company;
(o) by a shareholder, in a business reorganisation, of capital asset being
share or shares held in the predecessor co-operative bank, if the transfer is
made in consideration of the allotment to the shareholder of share or shares in
the successor co-operative bank or the converted banking company;

40

45

111

(p) of a capital asset, being bonds or Global Depository Receipts as
referred to in section 209(1), made outside India by a non-resident to another
non-resident;
5

10

(q) made outside India, of a capital asset, being rupee denominated bond
of an Indian company issued outside India, by a non-resident to another
non-resident;
(r) of a capital asset made by a non-resident on a recognised stock
exchange located in any International Financial Services Centre, where the
consideration for such transaction is paid or payable in foreign currency, and
such capital asset is—
(i) bond or Global Depository Receipt referred to in
section 209(1); or
(ii) rupee denominated bond of an Indian company; or
(iii) derivative; or

15

(iv) such other securities as notified by the Central Government;
(s) of a capital asset, being a Government security carrying a periodic
payment of interest, made outside India through an intermediary dealing in
settlement of securities, by a non-resident to another non-resident;

20

(t) in a relocation, of a capital asset by the original fund to the
resulting fund;
(u) by a shareholder or unit holder or interest holder, in a relocation, of
a capital asset being share or unit or interest held in the original fund in
consideration for the share or unit or interest in the resultant fund;

25

(v) of a capital asset by India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited
to an institution established for financing the infrastructure and development,
set up under an Act of Parliament and notified by the Central Government for
the purposes of this clause;
(w) of a capital asset, under a plan approved by the Central Government,
by a public sector company, to––

30

(i) another public sector company notified by the Central
Government for the purposes of this clause; or
(ii) the Central Government; or
(iii) a State Government;

35

(x) of Sovereign Gold Bond issued by the Reserve Bank of India under
the Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme, 2015, by way of redemption, by an
individual;
(y) of a capital asset, being conversion of gold into Electronic Gold
Receipt issued by a Vault Manager, or conversion of Electronic Gold Receipt
into gold;

40

(z) by way of conversion of bonds or debentures, debenture-stock or
deposit certificates in any form, of a company into shares or debentures of that
company;
(za) by way of conversion of bonds referred to in section 209(1)
(Table: Sl. No. 1) into shares or debentures of any company;

45

(zb) by way of conversion of preference shares of a company into equity
shares of that company;

112

(zc) of a capital asset, being any work of art, archaeological, scientific
or art collection, book, manuscript, drawing, painting, photograph or
print, to—
(i) the Government; or
(ii) a University; or

5

(iii) the National Museum, National Art Gallery or National
Archives; or
(iv) such other public museum or institution as notified by the
Central Government to be of national importance or of renown
throughout any State;

10

(zd) of a capital asset or intangible asset by a firm to a company as a
result of succession of the firm by a company in the business carried on by the
firm, if––
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the firm relating to the business
immediately before the succession become the assets and liabilities of
the company;
(ii) all the partners of the firm, immediately before the succession,
become the shareholders of the company in the same proportion in which
their capital accounts stood in the books of the firm on the date of the
succession;

15

20

(iii) the partners of the firm do not receive any consideration or
benefit, directly or indirectly, in any form or manner, other than by way
of allotment of shares in the company; and
(iv) the aggregate of the shareholding of the partners in the
company is at least 50% of the total voting power and such shareholding
remains the same for five years from the date of succession;
(ze) of a capital asset or intangible asset by a private company or unlisted
public company (herein referred to as the company) to a limited liability
partnership or transfer of a share or shares held in the company by a
shareholder as a result of conversion of the company into a limited liability
partnership under the provisions of section 56 or 57 of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008, if––
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the company, immediately before
the conversion, become the assets and liabilities of the limited liability
partnership;
(ii) all the shareholders of the company, immediately before the
conversion, become the partners of the limited liability partnership and
their capital contribution and profit sharing ratio in the limited liability
partnership are in the same proportion as their shareholding in the
company on the date of conversion;

25

30
6 of 2009.

35

40

(iii) the shareholders of the company do not receive any
consideration or benefit, directly or indirectly, other than by way of share
in profit and capital contribution in the limited liability partnership;
(iv) the aggregate of the profit sharing ratio of the shareholders of
the company in the limited liability partnership shall not be less than
50% at any time during five years from the date of conversion;

45

113

(v) the total sales, turnover or gross receipts in the business of the
company in any of the three tax years preceding the tax year in which
the conversion takes place does not exceed sixty lakh rupees;
5

10

(vi) the total value of the assets, as appearing in the books of
account of the company in any of the three tax years preceding the tax
year in which the conversion takes place does not exceed five crore
rupees; and
(vii) no amount is paid, either directly or indirectly, to any partner
out of balance of accumulated profit standing in the accounts of the
company on the date of conversion for three years from the date of
conversion;
(zf) of a capital asset or intangible asset (by way of sale or otherwise) by
a sole proprietorship concern to a company in case of succession of the sole
proprietorship concern by the company in the business carried on by it, if––

15

20

(i) all the assets and liabilities related to the business of the sole
proprietary concern, immediately before the succession, become the
assets and liabilities of the company;
(ii) the shareholding of the sole proprietor in the company is not
less than 50% of the total voting power in the company and this
shareholding continues to remain the same for five years from the date
of the succession; and
(iii) the sole proprietor does not receive any consideration or
benefit, directly or indirectly, except through allotment of shares in
the company;

25

30

(zg) in a scheme for lending of any securities under an agreement or
arrangement, entered into by the assessee with the borrower of such securities
and which is subject to the guidelines issued by the Securities and Exchange
Board of India or the Reserve Bank of India;
(zh) of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a
scheme notified by the Central Government;
(zi) of a capital asset, being share or shares of a special purpose vehicle
to a business trust in exchange of units allotted by that trust to the transferor;

35

(zj) of a capital asset, being a unit or units, held by a unit holder in the
consolidating scheme of a mutual fund, in consideration of the allotment to
the unit holder of a capital asset, being a unit or units, in the consolidated
scheme of the mutual fund subject to the condition that the consolidation is of
two or more schemes––
(i) of an equity-oriented fund; or
(ii) of a fund other than equity-oriented fund;

40

45

(zk) of a capital asset, being a unit or units, held by a unit holder in the
consolidating plan of a mutual fund scheme, in consideration of the allotment
to the unit holder of a capital asset, being a unit or units, in the consolidated
plan of that scheme of the mutual fund;
(zl) of a capital asset, being an interest in a joint venture, by a public
sector company, in exchange for shares of a company incorporated outside
India by the government of a foreign State, as per the laws of that
foreign State.

114

(2) In sub-section (1), the definitions of the expressions mentioned in
column C of the Table below shall apply to the corresponding clauses of the said
sub-section mentioned in column B of the said Table.
Table
Sl. No.

Clause

Definitions

A

B

C

1.

(i)

5

The expressions––
(a) “banking company” shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in section 5(c) of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);

10

(b) “banking institution” shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in section 45(15) of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949).
2.

3.

(n) and
(o)

“business reorganisation”, “converted banking
company”, “predecessor co-operative bank” and
“successor co-operative bank” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in section 65.

(r)

(a) “derivative” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 2(ac) of the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);

15

20

(b) “securities” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 2(h) of the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956).
4.

5.

(s)

(t) and
(u)

“Government Security” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 2(b) of the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956).

25

(a) “original fund” means—
(A) a fund established or incorporated or registered
outside India, which collects funds from its members
for investing it for their benefit and fulfils the following
conditions:—

30

(i) the fund is not a person resident in India;
(ii) the fund is a resident of a country or a specified
territory with which an agreement referred to in
section 159(1) or (2) has been entered into; or is
established or incorporated or registered in a country
or a specified territory as notified by the
Central Government;
(iii) the fund and its activities are subject to
applicable investor protection regulations in the
country or specified territory where it is established
or incorporated or is a resident; and
(iv) fulfils other conditions as prescribed;

35

40

115

A

B

(B) an investment vehicle, in which Abu Dhabi
Investment Authority is the direct or indirect sole
shareholder or unit holder or beneficiary or interest
holder and such investment vehicle is wholly owned
and controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Abu Dhabi
Investment Authority or the Government of Abu
Dhabi; or

5

(C) a fund notified by the Central Government subject
to conditions as specified;

10

(b) “relocation” means transfer of assets of the
original fund, or of its wholly owned special purpose
vehicle, to a resultant fund on or before the 31st
March, 2025, where consideration for such transfer is
discharged in the form of share or unit or interest in the
resulting fund to—

15

(i) a shareholder or unit holder or interest holder of
the original fund, in the same proportion in which the
share or unit or interest was held by such shareholder or
unit holder or interest holder in such original fund,
in lieu of their shares or units or interests in the
original fund; or

20

(ii) the original fund, in the same proportion as
referred to in sub-clause (i), in respect of which the
share or unit or interest is not issued by resultant fund
to its shareholder or unit holder or interest holder;

25

(c) “resultant fund” means a fund established or
incorporated in India in the form of a trust or a company
or a limited liability partnership, which is located in an
International Financial Services Centre as referred to in
section 147 and has been granted—

30

(i) a certificate of registration as a Category I or
Category II or Category III Alternative Investment
Fund, and is regulated under the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (Alternative Investment
Funds) Regulations, 2012 made under the Securities
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992)
or regulated under the International Financial
Services Centres Authority (Fund Management)
Regulations, 2022 made under the International
Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019
(50 of 2019); or

35

40

(ii) a certificate as a retail scheme or an Exchange
Traded Fund as per Schedule VI (Note 1) and which
fulfils the conditions specified in Schedule VI
(Table: Sl. No. 1).

45

6.
50

C

(y)

“Electronic Gold Receipt” and “Vault Manager” shall
have the same meanings as respectively assigned to them
in regulation 2(1)(h) and (l) of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (Vault Managers)
Regulations, 2021 made under the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992).

116

A

B

C

7.

(zc)

“University” means a University established or
incorporated by or under a Central Act or State Act or
Provincial Act and includes an institution declared under
section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956
(3 of 1956), to be a University for the purposes of that
Act.

8.

(ze)

“private company” and “unlisted public company” shall
have the same meanings as respectively assigned to them
in the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009).

9.

(zi)

“special purpose vehicle” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in Schedule V (Note 2).

10.

(zj)

(a) “consolidated scheme” means the scheme with
which the consolidating scheme merges or which is
formed as a result of such merger;
(b) “consolidating scheme” means the scheme of a
mutual fund which merges under the process of
consolidation of the schemes of mutual fund as per the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Mutual Funds)
Regulations, 1996 made under the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);

5

10

15

20

(c) “equity oriented fund” means a fund—
(i) where the investible funds are invested by way of
equity shares in domestic companies to the extent of
more than 65% of the total proceeds of such fund, for
which the percentage of equity shareholding shall be
computed with reference to the annual average of the
monthly averages of the opening and closing figures; and
(ii) which has been set up under a scheme of Mutual
Fund specified in Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 20 or 21);

25

30

(d) “mutual fund” means a mutual fund specified in
Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 20 or 21).
11.

(zk)

(a) “consolidating plan” means the plan within a scheme
of a mutual fund which merges under the process of
consolidation of the plans within a scheme of mutual fund
as per the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Mutual
Funds) Regulations, 1996 made under the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);
(b) “consolidated plan” means the plan with which the
consolidating plan merges or which is formed as a result
of such merger;

35

40

(c) “mutual fund” means a mutual fund specified in
Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 20 or 21); and
12.
Withdrawal of
exemption in
certain cases.

(zl)

“joint venture” means a business entity, as notified by
the Central Government.

71. (1) The profits or gains arising from the transfer of capital asset not
charged under section 67 by virtue of section 70(1)(c) and (d) shall, irrespective of
anything contained in the said clauses, be deemed to be income chargeable under
the head “Capital gains” of the tax year in which such transfer took place, if at any
time before the expiry of eight years from the date of such transfer,—

45

50

117

(a) the transferee company converts the capital asset into, or treats it as,
stock-in-trade of its business; or
(b) the parent company or its nominees or the holding company, ceases
or cease to hold the whole of the share capital of the subsidiary company.
5

(2) If any of the conditions laid down in section 70(zd) or (zf) are not complied
with, the profits or gains arising from the transfer of such capital asset or intangible
asset not charged under section 67 by virtue of such conditions shall be deemed to
be the profits and gains chargeable to tax under the head “Capital gains” of the
successor company for the tax year in which such conditions are not complied with.

10

(3) If any of the conditions laid down in section 70(ze) are not complied with,
the profits or gains arising from the transfer of such capital asset or intangible assets
or share or shares not charged under section 67 by virtue of such conditions shall be
deemed to be the profits and gains chargeable to tax under the head “Capital gains”of
the successor limited liability partnership or the shareholder of the predecessor
company, for the tax year in which such conditions are not complied with.

15

72. (1) Income chargeable under the head “Capital gains” shall be computed,
by deducting from the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result
of the transfer of the capital asset, the following amounts:—
20

(a) expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such
transfer; and
(b) the cost of acquisition of the asset and the cost of any improvement
thereto.

25

(2) In cases, as prescribed, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall have effect
as if for the words “cost of acquisition” and “cost of any improvement”, the words
“indexed cost of acquisition” and “indexed cost of any improvement” had
respectively been substituted.
(3) In computing the income chargeable under the head “Capital gains”, the
following amounts shall not be allowed as a deduction:—

30

(a) the interest claimed as deduction under section 22(1)(b) or under
Chapter VIII;
(b) any sum paid as securities transaction tax under Chapter VII of the
Finance (No.2) Act, 2004.

23 of 2004.

35

(4) If a unit holder receives any amount from a business trust with respect to
a unit that is not in the nature of income under Schedule V (Table: Sl. No. 3. or 4)
and is not chargeable to tax under section 92(2)(k) or 223(2), then,––
(a) such amount shall be reduced from the cost of acquisition of such
unit; and

40

45

(b) if the transaction of transfer of a unit is not considered as transfer
under section 70 and cost of acquisition of such unit is determined under
section 73, the amount received with respect to such unit before as well as
after such transaction, shall be reduced from the cost of acquisition.
(5) In case of value of any money or capital asset received by a specified
person from a specified entity, as referred to in section 67(10), the specified entity
is entitled to a deduction calculated in such manner, as prescribed for computing the
amount chargeable to income-tax in its hands under that sub-section which is
attributable to the transfer of such capital asset.

Mode of
computation of
capital gains.

118

(6) In the case of an assessee, who is a non-resident, capital gains arising from
the transfer of a capital asset being shares in, or debentures of, an Indian company
(other than equity shares referred to in section 198) shall be computed––
(a) by converting the cost of acquisition, expenditure incurred, wholly
and exclusively, in connection with such transfer and the full value of the
consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the capital asset
into the same foreign currency as was initially utilised in the purchase of the
shares or debentures; and
(b) the capital gains so computed in such foreign currency shall be
reconverted into Indian currency, so, however, that the said manner of
computation of capital gains shall be applicable in respect of capital gains
accruing or arising from every reinvestment thereafter in, and sale of, shares
in, or debentures of, an Indian company.
(7) In the case of an assessee who is a non-resident, any gains arising on
account of appreciation of rupee against a foreign currency at the time of
redemption of rupee denominated bond of an Indian company held by the
assessee, shall be ignored for the purpose of computing the full value of
consideration.

5

10

15

(8) In this section, the expressions––
(a) “Cost Inflation Index”, in relation to a tax year, means such Index as
the Central Government may, having regard to 75% of average rise in the
Consumer Price Index (urban) for the immediately preceding tax year to such
tax year, by notification, specify, in this behalf;
(b) “indexed cost of acquisition” means an amount which bears to the
cost of acquisition, the same proportion as Cost Inflation Index for the year in
which the asset is transferred bears to the Cost Inflation Index for the first year
in which the asset was held by the assessee or for the year beginning on
1st April, 2001, whichever is later; and
(c) “indexed cost of any improvement” means an amount which bears to
the cost of improvement, the same proportion as Cost Inflation Index for the
year in which the asset is transferred bears to the Cost Inflation Index for the
year in which the improvement to the asset took place.
Cost with
reference to
certain modes of
acquisition.

73. (1) In the case of a capital asset specified in column B of the Table
below, the cost of acquisition of the asset shall be deemed to be the cost as
mentioned in column C of the said Table.

20

25

30

35

Table
Sl. No.

Description of the capital asset

Cost of acquisition

A

B

C

1.

If the capital asset became the
property of the assessee––
(a) under a gift or will; or
(b) by succession, inheritance
or devolution; or

The cost for which
the previous owner of the
property acquired it, as
increased by the cost of
any
improvement
incurred or borne by the
previous owner or the
assessee.

40

45

119

A

B

C

(c) on any distribution of assets on
the liquidation of a company; or
(d) under a transfer to a revocable
or an irrevocable trust; or

5

(e) being a Hindu undivided
family, by the mode referred to
in section 99(3) after the
31st December, 1969; or
(f) under any such transfer as is
referred to in section 70(1)(a), (c),
(d), (e), (g), (h), (i), (j), (l), (m), (n),
(o), (t), (u), (v), (w), (zd), (ze) or (zf).

10

2.

Capital asset, being a share or shares in
an amalgamated company which is an
Indian company that became the property
of the assessee in consideration of a
transfer referred to in section 70(1)(f).

The
cost
of
acquisition to him of the
share or the shares in the
amalgamating company.

3.

Capital asset being a share or debenture
of a company, which became the property
of the assessee in consideration of a
transfer referred to in section 70(1)(z) or
(za).

That part of the cost of
debenture,
debenturestock, bond or deposit
certificate for which such
asset is acquired by the
assesse.

4.

Capital asset, being specified security or
Fair market value
sweat equity shares, referred to in taken into account for the
purposes of the said
section 17(2).
clause.

5.

Capital asset, being rights of a partner
referred to in section 42 of the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009),
which became the property of the assessee
on conversion as referred to in
section 70(1)(ze).

The
cost
of
acquisition of the share
or shares in the company
immediately before its
conversion.

6.

Capital asset, being share or shares of a
company acquired by a non-resident
assessee on redemption of Global
Depository Receipts referred to in section
209(1) (Table: Sl. No. 2) held by such
assessee.

The price of the said
share
or
shares
prevailing
on
any
recognised
stock
exchange on the date on
which a request for
redemption was made.

7.

Capital asset, being a unit of a business
trust, which became the property of the
assessee in consideration of a transfer as
referred to in section 70(1)(zi).

The
cost
of
acquisition of the share
referred to in the said
clause.

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

120

A

B

C

8.

Capital asset, being a unit or units in a
consolidated scheme of a mutual fund,
which became the property of the assessee
in consideration of a transfer referred to in
section 70(1)(zj).

The
cost
of
acquisition of the unit or
units in the consolidating
scheme of the mutual
fund.

Capital asset, being equity share of a
company, which became the property of
the assessee in consideration of a transfer
referred to in section 70(1)(zb).

That part of the cost of
the preference shares in
relation to which such
asset is acquired.

10

Capital asset, being a unit or units in a
consolidated plan of a mutual fund scheme,
which became the property of the assessee
in consideration of a transfer referred to in
section 70(1)(zk).

The
cost
of
acquisition of the unit or
units in the consolidating
plan of the scheme of the
mutual fund.

15

Capital asset being a unit or units in the
segregated portfolio.

Computed as per the
following formula:––

9.

10.

11.

5

X =AxB,
C
where,––
20

X = cost of
acquisition of the unit or
units
in
segregated
portfolio;
A = cost of
acquisition of unit or
units in the total
portfolio;
B = Net Asset
Value of the asset
transferred
to
the
segregated portfolio; and
C = Net Asset
Value of the total
portfolio
immediately
before segregation.
12.

Capital asset being original units held
by the unit holder in the main portfolio.

The
cost
of
acquisition as reduced
by the amount as so
arrived at under serial
number 11.

25

30

35

40

121

A
13.

B
Capital asset, being shares as referred to
in section 70(1)(zl) which became the
property of the assessee.

C
The
cost
of
acquisition to it of the
interest in the joint
venture referred to in the
said clause.

14.

Shares in the resulting company as a
result of demerger.

Computed as per the
following formula:––

5

X =AxB,
C

10

where,––
X = cost of
acquisition
of
shares
in
the
resulting company;

15

A = cost of
acquisition
of
shares in demerged
company;
20

B = net book
value of assets
transferred
in
demerger; and
C = net worth of
demerged
company
immediately before
demerger.

25

15.

Original shares held by the shareholder
As reduced by the
in the demerged company.
amount so arrived at
under serial number 14.

16.

Capital asset deemed to be chargeable to
tax according to the provisions of section
71(1).

35

17.

Capital asset being property, where the
The
value
taken
capital gain arises from the transfer of into
account
under
such property the value of which has been section 92(2)(m).
subject
to
income-tax
under
section 92(2)(m).

40

18.

Capital asset declared under the Income
The fair market value
Declaration Scheme, 2016, where the tax, of the asset taken into
surcharge and penalty have been paid as account for the purposes
per the provisions of such Scheme on the of the said Scheme.
fair market value as on the date of the
commencement of that Scheme.

30

45

Cost for which such
asset was acquired by the
transferee company.

122

A

B

C

19.

Specified capital asset referred to in
clause (c) of the Explanation to
section 10(37A) of the Income-tax
Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), which has been
transferred after the expiry of two years
from the end of the tax year in which the
possession of such asset was handed over
to the assessee.

The stamp duty value
as on the last day of the
second tax year after the
end of the tax year in
which the possession of
the said specified capital
asset was handed over to
the assessee.

20.

Capital asset, being share in the project,
The amount deemed
in the form of land or building, or both, as
full
value
of
under section 67(14).
consideration
under
section 67(14).

21.

Capital asset, being the asset held by a
The fair market value
trust or an institution in respect of which of the asset considered
accreted income has been computed and for
computation
of
tax paid thereon as per section 352.
accreted income as on
specified date as per
section 352(3).

22.

Capital asset referred to in section
26(2)(j).

The fair market value
for section 26(2)(j).

23.

Capital asset, being an Electronic Gold
Receipt issued by a Vault Manager, which
became the property of the person as
consideration of a transfer, as referred to in
section 70(1)(y).

The cost of gold for
the person in whose
name Electronic Gold
Receipt is issued.

Capital asset being gold released against
an Electronic Gold Receipt, which became
the property of the person as consideration
for a transfer as referred to in
section 70(1)(y).

The cost of the
Electronic Gold Receipt
for such person.

24.

5

10

15

20

25

30

(2) For the purposes of the Table in sub-section (1), in respect of the entries
against––
(a) serial number 1, “previous owner of the property” for any capital
asset owned by an assessee, means the last previous owner of the capital asset
who acquired it by a mode of acquisition other than that referred to in
column B thereof;
(b) serial numbers 11 and 12, “main portfolio”, “segregated
portfolio” and “total portfolio” shall have the same meanings as
respectively
assigned
to
them
in
the
Circular
No.
SEBI/HO/IMD/DF2/CIR/P/2018/160, dated the 28th December, 2018,
issued by the Securities and Exchange Board of India;
(c) serial numbers 14 and 15, “net worth” means the total of the paid-up
share capital and general reserves as appearing in the books of account of the
demerged company immediately before the demerger;
(d) serial numbers 2, 14 and 15, the provisions as contained therein,
shall, as far as may be, also apply in relation to business reorganisation of a
co-operative bank as referred to in section 65.

35

40

45

123

43 of 1961.
11 of 1922.
5

74. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 2(101), for a capital
asset forming part of a block of assets on which depreciation has been allowed
under this Act or under the Income-tax Act, 1961 or under the Indian Income-tax
Act, 1922, the provisions of sections 72 and 73 shall be subject to the provisions
of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4).

Special
provision for
computation of
capital gains in
case of
depreciable
assets.

(2) If, during the tax year, the full value of consideration received or accruing
for the transfer of one or more assets in a block of assets exceeds the total of the
following:––
(a) expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively for such transfer;
10

(b) the written-down value of the block of assets at the start of the tax
year; and
(c) the actual cost of any asset falling within the block of assets acquired
during the tax year,

15

such excess shall be deemed to be capital gains arising from the transfer of
short-term capital assets.
(3) If any block of assets ceases to exist for the reason that all the assets in that
block are transferred during the tax year, then,––

20

(a) the cost of acquisition of the block of assets shall be the written down
value of the block of assets at the beginning of the tax year, as increased by
the actual cost of any asset falling within that block of assets, acquired by the
assessee during the tax year; and
(b) the income received or accruing as a result of such transfer or
transfers shall be deemed to be short-term capital gains.

25

30

75. If depreciation has been obtained under section 33(2) for a capital asset in
any tax year, the provisions of sections 72 and 73 shall apply subject to the
modification that the written down value, as defined in section 41, of the asset, as
adjusted, shall be taken as the cost of acquisition of the asset.

Special
provision for
cost of
acquisition in
case of
depreciable
asset.

76. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 2(101) or section 72, the
gains on the transfer or redemption or maturity, of a capital asset as mentioned in
sub-section (2) shall be treated as short-term capital gains and shall be computed as
per sub-section (3).

Special
provision for
computation of
capital gains in
case of Market
Linked
Debenture.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the capital asset shall be—
(a) a unit of a Specified Mutual Fund acquired on or after 1st April, 2023
or a Market Linked Debenture; or
35

(b) an unlisted bond or an unlisted debenture which is transferred or
redeemed or matures on or after the 23rd July, 2024.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the short-term capital gains shall be
computed as per the following formula:––
X = A – B – C,

40

where,––
X = short-term capital gains;

124

A = full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of the
transfer or redemption or maturity of the debenture or unit or bond;
B = the cost of acquisition of the debenture or unit or bond; and
C = the expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively for such transfer or
redemption or maturity.

5

(4) No deduction shall be allowed for any sum paid as securities transaction
tax as per Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004.

23 of 2004.

(5) In this section,—
(a) “Market Linked Debenture” means a security, by whatever name
called, which has an underlying principal component in the form of a debt
security and where the returns are linked to market returns on other underlying
securities or indices, and include any security classified or regulated as a
market linked debenture by the Securities and Exchange Board of India; and
(b) “Specified Mutual Fund” means a Mutual Fund, by whatever name
called, which invests more than 65% of its total proceeds in debt and money
market instruments or a fund which invests 65% or more of its total proceeds
in units of such Mutual Fund, subject to the following:––
(i) the percentage of investment in debt and money market
instruments or in units of a fund shall be computed with reference to the
annual average of the daily closing figures;

10

15

20

(ii) “debt and money market instruments” shall include any
securities, by whatever name called, classified or regulated as debt and
money market instruments by the Securities and Exchange Board of
India.
Special
provision for
computation of
capital gains in
case of slump
sale.

77. (1) Any profits or gains arising from the slump sale effected in the tax year
shall be chargeable to income-tax as long-term capital gains and shall be deemed to
be the income of the tax year in which the transfer took place, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2).
(2) The profits and gains arising from a slump sale involving the transfer of a
capital asset, being one or more undertakings or divisions owned and held by an
assessee for 36 months or less, immediately before the date of its transfer, shall be
treated as short-term capital gains.

25

30

(3) In relation to capital assets, being an undertaking or division transferred by
way of slump sale,—
(a) the “net worth” of the undertaking or division shall be deemed as the
cost of acquisition and the cost of improvement for sections 72 and 73; and

35

(b) the fair market value of the capital assets on the date of transfer,
calculated in such manner, as prescribed, shall be deemed to be the full value
of the consideration received or accruing as a result of such transfer.
(4) Every assessee, in the case of slump sale, shall furnish in the prescribed
form a report of an accountant, before the specified date referred to in section 63,
and the report shall––
(a) include the computation of the net worth of the undertaking or
division; and

40

125

(b) certify that the net worth has been correctly arrived at as per the
provisions of this section.
(5) For the purposes of this section,––
5

(a) the “net worth” shall be the “aggregate value of total assets” of the
undertaking or division, as reduced by the value of its liabilities as appearing
in the books of account, and for computing net worth, any change in the value
of assets due to revaluation shall be ignored;
(b) the “aggregate value of total assets” shall,—

10

(i) for depreciable assets, be the written down value of the block
of assets determined under section 41(1) (Table: Sl. No.3);
(ii) for capital asset being goodwill of a business or profession,
which was not acquired by the assessee by purchase from a previous
owner, be nil;

15

(iii) for capital assets for which the entire expenditure has been
allowed or is allowable as a deduction under section 46, be nil; and
(iv) for other assets, be the book value.

20

78. (1) If the consideration received or accruing from the transfer of a capital
asset, being land or building or both, is less than the stamp duty value, then, for
the purposes of section 72, the stamp duty value shall be deemed to be the full
value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of such transfer, subject
to the following:––
(a) the stamp duty value on the date of agreement may be taken as the
full value of consideration, if––

25

(i) the date of the agreement fixing the consideration and the date
of registration for the transfer of the capital asset are not the same; and
(ii) part or full consideration is received on or before the date of
the agreement by an account payee cheque or account payee bank draft
or electronic clearing system through a bank account or any other
electronic mode, as prescribed;

30

35

(b) if the stamp duty value does not exceed 110% of the consideration
received or accruing, such consideration shall be deemed to be the full value
of the consideration for section 72.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Assessing
Officer may refer the valuation of the capital asset to a Valuation Officer, and
the provisions of sections 269(3) to (8), shall, with necessary modifications,
apply in relation to such reference, where––
(a) the assessee claims that the stamp duty value exceeds the fair market
value of the property as on the date of transfer; and

40

(b) the stamp duty value has not been disputed in any appeal or revision
or no reference has been made before any other authority, court or the High
Court.

Special
provision for full
value of
consideration in
certain cases.

126
(3) In this section, “assessable” means the value which any authority of the
Government would have adopted or assessed as if it were referred to such authority
for the purposes of payment of stamp duty, regardless of anything to the contrary
contained in any other law in force.
(4) If the value determined by the Valuation Officer on a reference made under
sub-section (2) exceeds the stamp duty value, such stamp duty value shall be taken
as the full value of consideration.
Special
provision for full
value of
consideration for
transfer of share
other than
quoted share.

79. (1) If the consideration received or accruing from the transfer of a capital
asset, being share of a company other than a quoted share, is less than the fair market
value of such share determined in the manner as prescribed, the value so determined
shall be deemed as the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of
the transfer for the purposes of computing income under the head “Capital gains”.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to any consideration
received or accruing as a result of transfer by such class of persons and subject to
such conditions, as prescribed.

5

10

15

(3) In this section, “quoted share” means the share quoted on any recognised stock
exchange with regularity from time to time, where the quotation of such share is based
on current transaction made in the ordinary course of business.
Fair market
value deemed to
be full value of
consideration in
certain cases.

80. If the consideration received or accruing from the transfer of a capital asset
is not ascertainable or is unable to be determined, its fair market value on the date
of transfer shall be deemed as the full value of consideration received or accruing
as a result of the transfer for the purposes of computing income under the head
“Capital gains”.

Advance money
received.

81. Where any capital asset was, on any previous occasion, the subject of
negotiations for its transfer, any advance or other money received and retained by
the assessee in respect of such negotiations––

20

25

(a) shall be deducted from the cost for which the asset was acquired or
the written down value or the fair market value, as the case may be, in
computing the cost of acquisition;
(b) shall not be deducted from the said cost, where such advance or other
money has been included in the total income of the assessee for any tax year
as per the provisions of section 92(2)(h).
Profit on sale of
property used for
residence.

30

82. (1) Where an individual or Hindu undivided family––
(a) has long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset,
being buildings or lands appurtenant thereto, and being a residential house, the
income of which is chargeable under the head “Income from house property”
(original asset); and
(b) has within one year before or two years after the date of such transfer
purchased, or has within three years after that date constructed, one residential
house in India (new asset),

35

40

then, instead of the capital gain being charged to income-tax as income of the tax
year in which the transfer took place, it shall be dealt with as follows:—
(i) if the capital gains exceeds the cost of the new asset, such excess shall
be charged under section 67, and for computing capital gains arising from the
transfer of the new asset within three years of its purchase or construction, the
cost shall be nil; or

45

127

(ii) if the capital gains is equal to or less than the cost of the new asset,
no capital gains shall be charged under section 67 and for computing capital
gains from the transfer of the new asset within three years of its purchase or
construction, the cost shall be reduced by the amount of the capital gains.
5

10

(2) If the capital gains is not used by the assessee to purchase the new asset
within one year before the transfer of the original asset, or is not utilised for the
purchase or construction of a new asset before filing the return of income under
section 263, then—
(a) the unutilised amount shall be deposited in a specified bank or
institution and utilised as per the scheme notified by the Central Government;
(b) such deposit shall be made not later than the due date applicable in the
case of the assessee for filing the return of income under section 263(1); and
(c) the proof of deposit shall be submitted along with the return on or
before the due date of filing of the return.

15

20

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the amount, already utilised for
purchasing or constructing the new asset, together with the deposited amount under
sub-section (2) shall, subject to sub-section (7), be deemed to be the cost of the new
asset.
(4) If the amount deposited under sub-section (2) is not fully utilised for
purchasing or constructing the new asset within the period specified in
sub-section (1), then,—
(a) the unutilised amount shall be charged to tax under section 67 as the
income of the tax year in which the period of three years from the date of the
transfer of the original asset expires; and

25

(b) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw the unused amount
according to the said scheme.
(5) If the capital gains under sub-section (1) does not exceed two crore rupees,
the assessee may, at his option, purchase or construct two residential houses in India,
and where such option has been exercised,—

30

(a) for the purposes of sub-section (1)(b), “one residential house in
India” shall be read as “two residential houses in India”; and
(b) for the purposes of sub-sections (1)(b) and (2), “new asset” shall
mean two residential houses in India.

35

(6) If during any tax year, the assessee has exercised the option mentioned in
sub-section (5), he shall not be entitled to exercise such option for the same tax year
or any other tax year.
(7) If the cost of new asset exceeds ten crore rupees, the amount exceeding
ten crore rupees shall not be taken into account for the purposes of sub-section (1).

40

(8) If the capital gains on the transfer of original asset exceeds ten crore
rupees, the amount exceeding ten crore rupees shall not be taken into account for
the purposes of sub-section (2).
83. (1) Where an assessee, being an individual or a Hindu undivided
family,––

45

(a) has capital gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset, being
land, which was used by the assessee or his parent, or the Hindu undivided
family for agricultural purposes (original asset), in two years immediately
preceding the date of transfer; and

Capital gains on
transfer of land
used for
agricultural
purposes not to
be charged in
certain cases.

128

(b) has, within two years after that date, purchased any other land for
being used for agricultural purposes (new asset),
then, instead of the capital gains being charged to income-tax as income of the tax
year in which the transfer took place, it shall be dealt with as follows:—
(i) if the capital gains exceed the cost of the new asset, such excess shall
be charged under section 67, and for computing any capital gains arising from
the transfer of the new asset within three years of its purchase, the cost shall
be nil; or
(ii) if the capital gains is equal to or less than the cost of the new asset,
no capital gains shall be charged under section 67, and for computing any
capital gains arising from the transfer of the new asset within three years of its
purchase, the cost shall be reduced by the amount of the capital gains.

5

10

(2) If the capital gains is not utilised by the assessee to purchase the new asset
before filing the return of income under section 263, then––
(a) the unutilised amount shall be deposited in a specified bank or
institution and utilised as per the scheme notified by the Central Government;

15

(b) such deposit shall be made not later than the due date applicable in
the case of the assessee for filing the return of income under section 263(1);
and
(c) the proof of deposit shall be submitted along with the return on or
before the due date of filing of the return.

20

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the amount already utilised for
purchasing the new asset together with the deposited amount under sub-section (2),
shall be deemed to be the cost of the new asset.
(4) If the amount deposited under sub-section (2) is not fully utilised for
purchase of the new asset within the period specified in sub-section (1), then,—

25

(a) the unutilised amount shall be charged under section 67 as the
income of the tax year in which two years from the date of the transfer of the
original asset expires; and
(b) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw the unused amount
according to the scheme referred to in sub-section (2).
Capital gains on
compulsory
acquisition of
lands and
buildings not to
be charged in
certain cases.

30

84. (1) Where an assessee has––
(a) capital gains arising from the transfer by way of compulsory
acquisition under any law, of a capital asset being land or building or any right
in land or building, forming part of an industrial undertaking belonging to him,
which was being used by the assessee for the business of the said undertaking
in the two years immediately preceding the date of transfer (original asset);
and
(b) within three years after that date, purchased any other land or
building or any right in any other land or building or constructed any other
building for shifting or re-establishing the said undertaking or setting up
another industrial undertaking (new asset),

35

40

then, instead of the capital gain being charged to income-tax as income of the tax
year in which the transfer took place, it shall be dealt with as follows:—
(i) if the capital gains exceeds the cost of new asset, such excess shall be
charged under section 67, and for computing any capital gains arising from
the transfer of the new asset within three years of its purchase or construction,
the cost shall be nil; or

45

129

(ii) if the capital gains is equal to or less than the cost of new asset, no
capital gains shall be charged under section 67 and for computing capital gains
from the transfer of the new asset within three years of its purchase or
construction, the cost shall be reduced by the amount of the capital gains.
5

10

(2) If the capital gains is not utilised by the assessee to purchase the new asset
before filing the return of income under section 263, then––
(a) the unutilised amount shall be deposited not later than the due date
for filing the return of income under sub-section (1) of the said section in a
specified bank or institution and utilised as per the scheme notified by the
Central Government;
(b) such deposit shall be made not later than the due date applicable in
the case of the assessee for filing the return of income under the said
sub-section; and

15

(c) the proof of deposit shall be submitted along with the return on or
before the due date for filing the return.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the amount already utilised for
purchasing or constructing the new asset together with the deposited amount under
sub-section (2), shall be deemed to be the cost of the new asset.

20

(4) If the amount deposited under sub-section (2) is not fully utilised for the
purchase or construction of the new asset within the period specified in
sub-section (1), then,—
(a) the unutilised amount shall be charged under section 67 as the
income of the tax year in which three years from the date of the transfer of the
original asset expires; and

25

(b) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw the unused amount
according to the said scheme.
85. (1) Where an assessee has––
(a) long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of land or building,
or both, (original asset); and

30

(b) within six months after the date of such transfer, invested whole or
part of the capital gains in a long-term specified asset (new asset),
then, the capital gains shall be dealt with as follows:—

35

(i) if the capital gains exceed the investment in the new asset, the
amount of capital gains as exceeds such investment shall be charged under
section 67; or
(ii) if the capital gains is equal to or less than the investment in the new
asset, the whole of such capital gains shall not be charged under section 67.

40

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), investment made in the long-term
specified asset from capital gain arising from transfer of one or more original asset
shall not exceed fifty lakh rupees,––
(a) during any tax year; or
(b) in the year of transfer of the original asset or assets and in the
subsequent tax year.

45

(3) If the new asset is transferred or converted (otherwise than by transfer) into
money within five years of its acquisition, the capital gains not charged under
section 67 as per sub-section (1), shall be deemed to be income chargeable as
long-term capital gains in the tax year of its transfer or conversion.

Capital gains not
to be charged on
investment in
certain bonds.

130

(4) Any loan or advance taken on the security of the new asset shall be
regarded as transfer of the new asset on the date of such loan or advance.
(5) Where the investment in the new asset has been taken into account for
sub-section (1), no deduction under section 123 for any tax year shall be allowed for
such investment.

5

(6) In this section, “new asset” means any bond, redeemable after five years
and as notified by the Central Government for the purposes of this section with such
conditions (including a condition for providing a limit on the amount of investment
by an assessee in such bond).
Capital gains on
transfer of
certain capital
assets not to be
charged in case
of investment in
residential
house.

86. (1) If an individual or a Hindu undivided family has––

10

(a) capital gains arising from the transfer of any long-term capital asset,
not being a residential house (original asset); and
(b) within one year before, or two years after, the date of such transfer,
purchased, or has within three years after that date constructed, one residential
house in India (new asset),

15

then, the capital gains shall be dealt with as follows:—
(i) if the net consideration is more than the cost of the new asset, so much
of the capital gains as bears to the whole of the capital gains, the same
proportion as the cost of the new asset bears to the net consideration, shall not
be charged under section 67; or

20

(ii) if the net consideration is equal to or less than the cost of the new
asset, no capital gains shall be charged under section 67.
(2) If the capital gains is not utilised by the assessee to purchase the new asset
within one year before the transfer of the original asset, or is not utilised for the
purchase or construction of a new asset before filing the return of income under
section 263, then,––

25

(a) the unutilised amount shall be deposited in a specified bank or
institution and utilised as per the scheme notified by the Central Government;
(b) such deposit shall be made not later than the due date applicable in
the case of the assessee for filing the return of income under sub-section (1)
of the said section; and

30

(c) the proof of deposit shall be submitted along with the return on or
before the due date for filing the return.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the amount already utilised for
purchasing or constructing the new asset together with the deposited amount under
sub-section (2) shall, subject to the sub-section (8), be deemed to be the cost of the
new asset.
(4) If the amount deposited under sub-section (2) is not wholly or partly
utilised for purchasing or constructing the new asset within the period specified in
sub-section (1), then,––

35

40

(a) the amount determined as per with the following formula shall be
charged under section 67 as income of the tax year in which three years from
the date of the transfer of the original asset expires:––
X - Y,
where,––
X = the capital gains not charged under section 67 as per sub-section (1).

45

131

Y = the capital gains that would not have been charged under section 67,
if the cost of the new asset had been taken to be the amount actually utilised
for purchase or construction of the new asset;
5

(b) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw the unused amount
according to the said scheme.
(5) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply, if––
(a) the assessee—
(i) owns more than one residential house, other than the new asset,
on the date of transfer of the original asset; or

10

(ii) purchases any residential house, other than the new asset,
within two years of transfer of the original asset; or
(iii) constructs any residential house, other than the new asset,
within three years of transfer of the original asset; and

15

(b) the income from such residential house, other than the one residential
house owned on the date of transfer of the original asset, is chargeable under
the head “Income from house property”.

20

(6) If the assessee purchases within two years of the transfer of the original
asset, or constructs within three years after such date, any residential house, the
income from which is chargeable under the head “Income from house property”,
other than the new asset, the capital gains not charged under section 67 on the
basis of cost of such new asset as per sub-section (1), shall be charged as
long-term capital gains of the tax year in which such residential house is
purchased or constructed.

25

(7) If the new asset is transferred within three years of its purchase or its
construction, the capital gains not charged under section 67 on the basis of cost of
such new asset as per sub-section (1) shall be charged as long-term capital gains of
the tax year in which such new asset is transferred.
(8) If the cost of the new asset exceeds ten crore rupees, the amount exceeding
ten crore rupees, shall not be taken into account for the purposes of sub-section (1).

30

35

(9) If the net consideration on the transfer of original asset exceeds
ten crore rupees, the amount exceeding ten crore rupees, shall not be taken into
account for the purposes of sub-section (2).
(10) In this section, “net consideration” means the full value of the
consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the original asset as
reduced by any expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with
such transfer.
87. (1) If the assessee has––

40

(a) capital gains arising from the transfer of capital asset, being
machinery or plant or building or land or any rights in building or land used
for the business of an industrial undertaking situated in an urban area, effected
in the case of shifting of an industrial undertaking situated in an urban area
(original asset) to any non-urban area (new area); and
(b) within one year before or three years after the date of such transfer,—

45

(i) purchased new machinery or plant for business of the industrial
undertaking in the new area;

Exemption of
capital gains on
transfer of assets
in cases of
shifting of
industrial
undertaking
from urban area.

132

(ii) acquired building or land or constructed building for his
business in the said area;
(iii) shifted the original asset and transferred its establishment to
such area; and
(iv) incurred expenses on such other purpose as specified in a
scheme notified by the Central Government for this section,

5

then, instead of the capital gains being charged to income tax as income of the
tax year in which the transfer took place, it shall be dealt with as follows:—
(A) if the cost and expenses incurred in on all or any of the purposes
mentioned in clauses (i) to (iv) (new asset),––

10

(I) is less than the capital gains, the difference shall be
charged under section 67 as the income of the tax year; or
(II) is equal to or more than the capital gain, no capital gain
shall be charged under section 67;
(B) for computing any capital gain arising from transfer of the
new asset within three years of its being purchased, acquired,
constructed or transferred, the cost shall be nil in case of clause (a)
or shall be reduced by the amount of the capital gain in case of
clause (b).

15

(2) If the capital gain is not used by the assessee for the new asset within one
year before the transfer of the original asset, or before filing the return of income
under section 263, then––

20

(a) the unutilised amount shall be deposited in a specified bank or
institution and utilised as per the scheme notified by the Central
Government;

25

(b) such deposit shall be made not later than the due date applicable in
the case of the assessee for filing the return of income under sub-section (1)
of the said section; and
(c) the proof of deposit shall be submitted along with the return on or
before the due date for filing the return.

30

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the amount already utilised for
purchasing or constructing the new asset together with the deposited amount under
sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be the cost of the new asset.
(4) If the amount deposited under sub-section (2) is not wholly or partly
utilised for the new asset within the period specified in sub-section (1), then,—

35

(a) the unutilised amount shall be charged under section 67 as the
income of the tax year in which the period of three years from the date of the
transfer of the original asset expires; and
(b) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw the unused amount
according to the said scheme.

40

(5) In this section, the expression “urban area” means any area within the
limits of a municipal corporation or municipality, declared to be an urban area by
the Central Government for the purposes of this section, having regard to––
(a) the population;
(b) concentration of industries; and

45

133

(c) need for proper planning of the area and other relevant factors.
88. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 87 if the assessee has––

5

(a) capital gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset, being
machinery or plant or building or land or any rights in building or land used
for the business of an industrial undertaking situated in an urban area, effected
in the course of or in consequence of shifting of such industrial undertaking
(original asset) to any Special Economic Zone in any area; and
(b) has within one year before or three years after the date of such
transfer,—

10

(i) purchased machinery or plant for the business of the industrial
undertaking in such Special Economic Zone;
(ii) acquired building or land or constructed building for his
business in such Special Economic Zone;

15

(iii) shifted the original asset and transferred the establishment to
such Special Economic Zone; and
(iv) incurred expenses on such other purposes specified by a
scheme notified by the Central Government in this behalf,
then, instead of capital gain being charged to income-tax as income of the tax
year in which the transfer took place, it shall be dealt with as follows:—

20

(A) if the cost and expenses incurred in on all or any of the purposes
mentioned in clauses (i) to (iv) (new asset)––
(I) is less than the capital gains, the difference shall be
charged under section 67 as the income of the tax year; or

25

(II) is equal to or more than the capital gains, no capital gain
shall be charged under section 67;
(B) for computing any capital gain arising from transfer of the new
asset within three years of its being purchased, acquired, constructed or
transferred, the cost shall be nil in case of clause (a), or shall be reduced
by the amount of the capital gain in case of clause (b).

30

35

(2) If the capital gain is not utilised by the assessee for the new asset within
one year before the transfer of the original asset, or before filing the return of income
under section 263, then,––
(a) the unutilised amount shall be deposited not later than the due date
for filing the return of income under sub-section (1) of the said section in a
specified bank or institution and utilised as per the scheme notified by the
Central Government;
(b) such deposit shall be made not later than the due date applicable in
the case of the assessee for filing the return of income under the said
sub-section; and

40

(c) the proof of deposit shall be submitted along with the return on or
before the due date for filing the return.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the amount already utilised for
purchasing or constructing the new asset together with the deposited amount under
sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be the cost of the new asset.

Exemption of
capital gains on
transfer of assets
in cases of
shifting of
industrial
undertaking
from urban area
to any Special
Economic Zone.

134

(4) If the amount deposited under sub-section (2) is not wholly or partly
utilised for the new asset within the period specified in sub-section (1), then,—
(a) the unutilised amount shall be charged under section 67 as the
income of the tax year in which the period of three years from the date of the
transfer of the original asset expires; and

5

(b) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw the unused amount
according to the said scheme.
(5) In this section “urban area” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 87.
Extension of
time for
acquiring
new asset or
depositing or
investing
amount of
capital gains.

Meaning of
“adjusted”,
“cost of
improvement”
and “cost of
acquisition”.

89. Irrespective of anything contained in sections 82, 83, 84, 85, and 86,––

10

(a) if the transfer of the original asset mentioned in those sections is by
way of compulsory acquisition under any law; and
(b) if the compensation awarded for such acquisition is not received by
the assessee on the date of transfer, then, the period available to him under
those sections for acquisition of the new asset or investment or deposit of
capital gain in specified bank or institution shall be reckoned from the date
of receipt of compensation.

15

90. (1) For the purposes of sections 72 and 73, “cost of improvement”,—
(a) in relation to a capital asset being goodwill or any intangible asset
of a business, or a right to manufacture, produce or process any article or
thing, or right to carry on any business or profession, or any other right, shall
be taken to be nil; and

20

(b) in relation to any other capital asset,—
(i) if the capital asset became the property of the previous owner
or the assessee before the 1st April, 2001, means all expenditure of a
capital nature incurred on or after the said date in making any additions
or alterations to the capital asset by the previous owner or the assessee;
and
(ii) in any other case, all expenditure of a capital nature incurred
in making any additions or alterations to the capital asset by the
assessee after it became his property, and, where the capital asset
became the property of the assessee by any of the modes specified in
section 73 (Table: Sl. No. 1), by the previous owner.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1)(b), the cost of improvement does not
include any expenditure which is deductible in computing the income chargeable
under the head “Income from house property”, “Profits and gains of business or
profession” or “Income from other sources”.
(3) For the purposes of sections 72 and 73, “cost of acquisition”, of a capital
asset (being goodwill of a business or profession, or a trade mark or brand name
associated with a business or profession, or any other intangible asset, or a right to
manufacture, produce or process any article or thing, or a right to carry on any
business or profession, or tenancy rights, or stage carriage permits, or loom hours,
or any other right) means—
(a) purchase price, if acquisition of such asset by the assessee is by
purchase from the previous owner; and

25

30

35

40

45

135

(b) purchase price for the previous owner, in the case covered in section
73 (Table: Sl. No. 1), where such asset was acquired by purchase by the
previous owner as defined in sub-section (2) of the said section; and
(c) nil, in any other case.
5

(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3)(a) or (b), if—
(a) the capital asset is goodwill of a business or profession; and

43 of 1961.
10

(b) the assessee has obtained a deduction on account of depreciation
under section 32(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in a tax year preceding the
tax year commencing on the 1st April, 2020,
then the total amount of depreciation obtained before the tax year
commencing on the 1st April, 2020 shall be reduced from the amount of
purchase price.

15

42 of 1956.

(5) For the purposes of sections 72 and 73(a) and (b), and subject to the
provisions of sub-sections (9)(a) and (b), “cost of acquisition” shall be as per
sub-section (6), in a case where, by virtue of holding a capital asset, being a share or
any other security, within the meaning of section 2(h) of the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (herein referred to as the financial asset), the assessee—
(a) becomes entitled to subscribe to any additional financial asset; or

20

(b) is allotted any additional financial asset without any payment.
(6) In a case referred to in sub-section (5), “cost of acquisition”, in relation to––
(a) the original financial asset, on the basis of which the assessee
becomes entitled to any additional financial asset, means the amount actually
paid for acquiring the original financial asset;

25

30

(b) any right to renounce the said entitlement to subscribe to the
financial asset, when such right is renounced by the assessee in favour of any
person, shall be taken to be nil in the case of such assessee;
(c) the financial asset, to which the assessee has subscribed on the basis
of the said entitlement, means the amount actually paid for acquiring such
asset;
(d) the financial asset allotted to the assessee without any payment and
on the basis of holding of any other financial asset, shall be taken to be nil;
and

35

40

(e) any financial asset purchased by any person in whose favour the
right to subscribe to such asset has been renounced, means the total amount
of the purchase price paid to the person renouncing such right and the amount
paid to the company or institution, for acquiring such financial asset.
(7) For the purposes of sections 72 and 73, “cost of acquisition”, subject to
sub-sections (9)(a) and (b), in relation to a long-term capital asset, being an equity
share in a company or a unit of an equity oriented fund or a unit of a business trust
referred to in section 198, acquired before the 1st February, 2018, shall be higher
of—
(a) the cost of acquisition of such asset; and
(b) lower of—

45

(i) the fair market value of such asset; and
(ii) the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result
of the transfer of the capital asset.

136

(8) For the purposes of sub-section (7),—
(a) “Cost Inflation Index”, shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 72(8)(ii);
(b) “fair market value” means,—
(i) in a case where the capital asset is listed on any recognised
stock exchange as on the 31st January, 2018, the highest price of the
capital asset quoted on such exchange on that date;
(ii) irrespective of sub-clause (i), if there is no trading in such
asset on such exchange on the 31st January, 2018, the highest price
of such asset on such exchange on a date immediately preceding the
31st January, 2018 when such asset was traded shall be the fair
market value;
(iii) if the capital asset is a unit which is not listed on a recognised
stock exchange as on the 31st January, 2018, the net asset value of such
unit as on that date;

5

10

15

(iv) if the capital asset is an equity share in a company which is—
(A) not listed on a recognised stock exchange as on the 31st
January, 2018 but listed on the date of transfer;
(B) not listed on a recognised stock exchange as on the 31st
January, 2018, or which became the property of the assessee in
consideration of share which is not listed on such exchange as on
the 31st January, 2018 by way of transaction mentioned in
section 70, but listed on such exchange subsequent to the date of
transfer (where such transfer is in respect of sale of unlisted equity
shares under an offer for sale to the public included in an initial
public offer);
(C) listed on a recognised stock exchange on the date of
transfer and which became the property of the assessee in
consideration of share which is not listed on such exchange as on
the 31st January, 2018 by way of transaction mentioned in
section 70,
an amount which bears to the cost of acquisition the same proportion as Cost
Inflation Index for the tax year 2017-18 bears to the Cost Inflation Index for
the first year in which the asset was held by the assessee or for the year
beginning on the 1st April, 2001, whichever is later.

20

25

30

35

(9) For the purposes of sections 72 and 73, cost of acquisition in relation to
any other capital asset,—
(a) if the capital asset became the property of the assessee before the
1st April, 2001, subject to sub-section (10), shall be the cost of acquisition of
the asset to the assessee or its fair market value on the 1st April, 2001, at the
option of the assessee;
(b) if the capital asset became the property of the assessee by any of
the modes specified in section 73 (Table: Sl. No. 1), and the capital asset
became the property of the previous owner before the 1st April, 2001,
subject to sub-section (10), shall be the cost of the capital asset to the
previous owner or its fair market value on the 1st April, 2001, at the
option of the assessee;

40

45

137

5

(c) if the capital asset became the property of the assessee on the
distribution of the capital assets of a company on its liquidation and the
assessee has been assessed to income-tax under the head “Capital gains” in
respect of that asset under section 68, means the fair market value of the asset
on the date of distribution;
(d) if the capital asset, being a share or a stock of a company, became
the property of the assessee on—
(i) the consolidation and division of all or any of the share capital
of the company into shares of larger amount than its existing shares; or

10

(ii) the conversion of any shares of the company into stock; or
(iii) the re-conversion of any stock of the company into shares; or
(iv) the sub-division of any of the shares of the company into
shares of smaller amount; or

15

(v) the conversion of one kind of shares of the company into
another kind,
means the cost of acquisition of the asset calculated with reference to the cost of
acquisition of the shares or stock from which such asset is derived.

20

25

(10) In case of a capital asset referred to in sub-sections (9)(a) and (9)(b),
being land or building, or both, the fair market value of such asset on the 1st April,
2001 for the said clauses shall not exceed the stamp duty value, wherever available,
of such asset as on the 1st April, 2001.
(11) If the cost for which the previous owner acquired the property is unable
to be ascertained, the cost of acquisition to the previous owner shall be the fair
market value on the date on which the capital asset became the property of the
previous owner.
91. (1) For ascertaining the fair market value of a capital asset for this
Chapter, the Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of capital asset to a
Valuation Officer,—

30

Reference to
Valuation
Officer.

(a) if the value of the asset claimed by the assessee is as per the estimate
by a registered valuer, but the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that the
value so claimed is at variance with its fair market value;
(b) in any other case, if the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that––

35

(i) the fair market value of the asset exceeds the value claimed
by the assessee by more than the percentage or amount, as
prescribed; or
(ii) having regard to the nature of the asset and other relevant
circumstances, it is necessary so to do.

27 of 1957.

(2) The provisions of section 269(3) to (8) shall , with necessary
modifications, apply in relation to such reference made under sub-section (1).
40

F.— Income from other sources
92. (1) Income of every kind which is not to be excluded from the total
income, shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head “Income from other
sources”, if it is not chargeable to income-tax under any of the heads specified in
section 13(a) to (d).

Income from
other sources.

138

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of
sub-section (1), the following incomes shall be chargeable to income-tax under the
head “Income from other sources”:––
(a) any dividend;
(b) any winning from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including
horse races, card games and other games of any sort or from gambling or
betting of any form or nature;
(c) any sum received by the assessee from employees as contributions to
any provident fund, superannuation fund, any fund set up under the Employees’
State Insurance Act, 1948, or any other fund for the welfare of such employees,
if the income in not chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains
of business or profession”;
(d) any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy, as defined
Schedule II (Note 1) including the bonus allocated on such policy, if such
income is not chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” or under the head “Salaries”;

5

10 34 of 1948.

15

(e) any income by way of interest on securities, if the income is not
chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”;
(f) any income from machinery, plant or furniture belonging to the
assessee and let on hire, if the income is not chargeable to income-tax under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”;
(g) any income from letting on hire of machinery, plant or furniture,
belonging to the assessee and also buildings, where the letting of the building
is inseparable from the letting of such machinery, plant or furniture, if the
income is not chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession”;

20

25

(h) any sum of money received as an advance or otherwise during
negotiations for the transfer of a capital asset, if––
(i) such sum is forfeited; and

30

(ii) the negotiations do not result in transfer of such capital asset;
(i) any income by way of interest received on compensation or on
enhanced compensation referred to in section 278(1);
(j) any compensation or other payment, due to or received by any
person, by whatever name called, in connection with the termination of his
employment, or the modification of its terms and conditions;

35

(k) any specified sum received by a unit holder from a business trust
during the tax year with respect to a unit held by him at any time during such
tax year, the computation of which shall be––
specified sum = A-B-C (which shall be deemed to be zero, if the
sum of B and C is greater than A), where—
A = aggregate of the sum distributed by the business trust with
respect to such unit, during the tax year or during any earlier tax year
or years, to such unit holder, who holds such unit on the date of
distribution of sum or to any other unit holder who held such unit at
any time prior to the date of such distribution, which is—
(a) not in the nature of income referred to in Schedule
V (Table: Sl. No. 3 or 4); and
(b) not chargeable to tax under section 223(2);

40

45

139

B = amount at which such unit was issued by the business
trust; and
C = amount charged to tax under this clause in any earlier
tax year;
5

(l) where any sum, including bonus allocated, is received, during a tax
year, under a life insurance policy, other than—
(a) sums received under a unit linked insurance policy; or
(b) income referred to in clause (d),

10

and such sum is not to be excluded from the total income of that tax year under
Schedule II (Table: Sl. No. 2), the sum exceeding the aggregate of the premium
paid, during the term of such policy, and not claimed as a deduction under this Act,
computed in such manner, as prescribed;
(m) where any person receives in any tax year, from any person or
persons––

15

(i) any sum of money without consideration, the total of which
exceeds fifty thousand rupees, the whole of such sum;
(ii) any immovable property—

20

(A) without consideration, the stamp duty value of which
exceeds fifty thousand rupees, the stamp duty value of such
property;
(B) for a consideration, the stamp duty value of such
property that exceeds such consideration, if this excess amount is
more than the higher of the following amounts:—
(I) fifty thousand rupees; or

25

(II) 10% of the consideration;
(iii) any property, other than immovable property,—
(A) without consideration, the aggregate fair market value
of which exceeds fifty thousand rupees, the whole of the
aggregate fair market value of such property;

30

35

(B) for a consideration which is less than the aggregate fair
market value of the property by an amount exceeding fifty
thousand rupees, the aggregate fair market value of such property
as exceeds such consideration.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2)(m) shall not apply to any sum of money
or any property received—
(a) from any relative; or
(b) on the occasion of marriage of the individual; or
(c) under a will or by way of inheritance; or
(d) in contemplation of death of the payer or donor; or

40

(e) from any local authority as defined in Schedule III (Note 6); or

140

(f) from or by any registered non-profit organisation as defined in
section 355(g), except when received by any person referred to in
section 355(i); or
(g) by way of a transaction not regarded as transfer under section 70(1)(a),
(c), (d), (e), (g), (i), (j), (l), (n), (o), (k), (f), (t), (u), (v) or (w); or

5

(h) from an individual by a trust created or established solely for the
benefit of relative of the individual; or
(i) from such class of persons and subject to such conditions, as
prescribed.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (2)(m)(ii),––
(a) if the date of agreement fixing the amount of consideration for the
transfer of immovable property and the date of registration are not the same,
the stamp duty value on the date of agreement shall apply, provided the
consideration, in whole or in part, has been paid by account payee cheque or
account payee bank draft or by electronic clearing system through a bank
account or through any prescribed electronic mode, on or before the date of
agreement for transfer of such immovable property;
(b) if the stamp duty value of immovable property is disputed by the
assessee on the grounds mentioned in section 78(2) the Assessing Officer may
refer the valuation of such property to a Valuation Officer, and the provisions
of sections 78(2) and 288 (Table: Sl. No. 8) shall, as far as may be, apply to
the stamp duty value of such property as they apply for valuation of capital
asset under those sections.

10

15

20

(5) In this section,––
(a) “assessable” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 78(3);

25

(b) “card game and other game of any sort” includes any game show,
an entertainment programme on television or electronic mode, where people
compete to win prizes or any similar game;
(c) “fair market value” of a property, other than an immovable property,
means the value determined in such method as prescribed;

30

(d) “jewellery” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 2(22);
(e) “lottery” includes winnings from prizes awarded by draw of lots, by
chance, or in any other manner under any scheme or arrangement by
whatever named called;

35

(f) “property” means the following capital asset of the assesse:—
(i) immovable property being land or building or both;
(ii) shares and securities;
(iii) jewellery;

(iv) archaeological collections;
(v) drawings;

40

141

(vi) paintings;
(vii) sculptures;
(viii) any work of art;
(ix) bullion; or
5

(x) virtual digital asset;
(g) “relative” means—
(i) in case of an individual—
(A) spouse;
(B) brother or sister;

10

(C) brother or sister of the spouse;
(D) brother or sister of either of the parents;
(E) any lineal ascendant or descendant (maternal as well as
paternal);

15

(F) any lineal ascendant (maternal as well as paternal) or
descendant (maternal as well as paternal) of the spouse;
(G) spouse of the person referred to in items (B) to (F); and
(ii) for a Hindu undivided family, any member thereof;
(h) “unit linked insurance policy” shall have the meaning assigned to it
in Schedule II (Note 1).

20

25

93. (1) The income chargeable under the head “Income from other sources”
shall be computed after making the following deductions:—
(a) for dividends [excluding those referred to in section 2(40)(f) or
interest on securities, any reasonable sum paid as commission or
remuneration to a banker or any other person for the purpose of realising such
dividend or interest on behalf of the assessee;
(b) for income of the nature referred to in section 92(2)(c), so far as
may be, an amount as per section 29(1)(e);

30

(c) for income of the nature referred to in section 92(2)(f) and
(g), so far as may be, an amount as per section 28(1)(a), (b), (d), section 33,
and subject to the provisions of section 28(2);
(d) for income in the nature of family pension (a regular monthly
amount payable by the employer to a family member of an employee upon
the death of such employee),––

35

(i) an amount equal to one-third of such income or twenty-five
thousand rupees, whichever is less, where income-tax is computed
under section 202(1); and
(ii) an amount equal to one-third of such income or fifteen
thousand rupees, whichever is less, in any other case;

Deductions.

142

(e) any other expenditure (not being in the nature of capital
expenditure) laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for making or
earning such income;
(f) for income of the nature referred to in section 92(2)(i), an amount
equal to 50% of such income and no other deduction shall be allowed under
this section.

5

(2) In respect of––
(a) dividend income of the nature referred to in section 2(40)(f), no
deduction shall be allowed;
(b) any other dividend income [other than in clause (a)], or income from
units of a Mutual Fund specified under Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 20 or 21) or
income from units of a specified company as referred to in section 2(h) of the
Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002, only
deduction allowed shall be interest expense which, for any tax year, shall be
limited to 20% of such income (included in the total income for that year,
without deduction under this section).
Amounts not
deductible.

10

58 of 2002.
15

94. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 93, the following
amounts shall not be deductible in computing the income of any assessee
chargeable under the head “Income from other sources”:—
(a) any personal expenses of the assessee; or

20

(b) any interest chargeable under this Act, payable outside India,
on which tax has not been paid or deducted under Chapter XIX-B; or
(c) any payment chargeable under the head “Salaries”, if it is
payable outside India, unless tax has been paid or deducted under
Chapter XIX-B.

25

(2) The provisions of sections 29, 35(b)(i), and 36 shall apply in computing
the income chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” as they apply
in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business
or profession”.
(3) For an assessee, being a foreign company, the provisions of section 59
shall apply in computing the income chargeable under the head “Income from other
sources”, as they apply in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession”.
(4) In computing the income from winnings from lotteries, crossword
puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games of any sort, or
from gambling or betting of any form or nature, no deduction for any expenditure
or allowance related to such income shall be allowed under this Act.
(5) Sub-section (4) shall not apply in computing the income of an assessee,
being the owner of horses maintained for running in horse races, from the activity
of owning and maintaining such horses.

30

35

40

(6) In this section, “horse race” means a horse race upon which wagering or
betting may be lawfully made.
Profits
chargeable to
tax.

95. The provision of section 38(1)(a) shall apply in computing the income of
an assessee under section 92, as they apply in computing the income of an assessee
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.

45

