212
(12) “tax treaty” means an agreement referred to in section 159(1) or (2).
CHAPTER XII
MODE OF PAYMENT IN CERTAIN CASES ETC.
Mode of taking
or accepting
certain loans,
deposits and
specified sum.

185.(1) No person shall take or accept from another person any loan or deposit
or specified sum, except through—

5

(a) an account payee cheque;
(b) account payee bank draft;
(c) electronic clearing system through a bank account; or
(d) any other prescribed electronic mode,
10

if,––
(i) the amount or the aggregate amount of such loan, deposit, or specified
sum; or
(ii) the amount or the aggregate amount of any previously taken or
accepted loan or deposit or specified sum by such person from such
another person, which is remaining unpaid, whether due for repayment
or not, as on the date of taking or accepting such amount as referred to in
clause (i); or

15

(iii) the aggregate of the amounts referred to in of clauses (i) and (ii),
is twenty thousand rupees or more.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to loans or deposits or specified sums taken
or accepted from or by,––

20

(a) the Government;
(b) any banking company, post office savings bank, or co-operative
bank;
(c) any corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial Act;

25

(d) any Government company as defined under section 2(45) of the
Companies Act, 2013;

18 of 2013.

(e) any institution, association, or body or class of institutions,
associations or bodies notified by the Central Government.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to any loan or deposit or
specified sum where, the person taking or accepting such loan or deposit or specified
sum and person from whom such loan or deposit or specified sum is taken or
accepted, both, have agricultural income and neither has any income chargeable to
tax under this Act.
(4) In sub-section (1), “two lakh rupees” shall be substituted for “twenty
thousand rupees” in the case of any deposit or loan, where—

30

35

(a) such deposit is accepted by a primary agricultural credit society or a
primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank from its
member; or
(b) such loan is taken from a primary agricultural credit society or
primary co-operative agricultural and development bank by its member.
(5) In this section, “loan or deposit” means loan or deposit of money.

40

213

186. (1) No person shall receive two lakh rupees or more––
(a) in aggregate from a person in a day; or

Mode of
undertaking
transactions.

(b) in respect of a single transaction; or
(c) in respect of transactions relating to one event or occasion from a person,
5

except through—
(i) an account payee cheque;
(ii) account payee bank draft;
(iii) electronic clearing system through a bank account; or
(iv) any other electronic mode, as prescribed.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to—

10

(a) any receipt by Government, any banking company, post office
savings bank, or co-operative bank;
(b) transactions of the nature referred to in section 185;
(c) such other persons or class of persons or receipts, as notified by the
Central Government.

15

187.Every person shall provide facility for accepting payment, through
electronic modes as prescribed, in addition to other electronic modes, if any, being
provided by him, where––

Acceptance of
payment through
prescribed
electronic
modes.

(a) such person is carrying on business; and
20

(b) total sales, turnover, or gross receipts in such business exceeds
fifty crore rupees during the immediately preceding tax year.
188. (1) No branch of a banking company or co-operative bank and no other
company or co-operative society and no firm or other person shall repay—
(a) any loan or deposit made with it; or
(b) any specified advance received by it,

25

except through––
(i) an account payee cheque; or
(ii) account payee bank draft drawn in the name of the person who has
made the loan or deposit or paid the specified advance; or
(iii) by use of electronic clearing system through a bank account, or any
other prescribed electronic mode,

30

if,––
(A) loan or deposit or specified advance, together with the interest, if
any, payable thereon; or
35

40

(B) the aggregate amount of the loans or deposits held by such person
with the branch of the banking company or co-operative bank or, as the case
may be, the other company or co-operative society or the firm or other person
(either individually or jointly) on the date of such repayment together with
interest, if any, payable thereon; or
(C) the aggregate amount of the specified advances received by such
person (either individually or jointly) on the date of such repayment together
with the interest, if any, payable thereon,
is twenty thousand rupees or more.

Mode of
repayment of
certain loans or
deposits.

214

(2) Irrespective of the provision in sub-section (1), a branch of a banking
company or co-operative bank, may also make the repayment by crediting such loan
or deposit to the savings bank account or current account, if any, with such branch
of the person to whom such loan or deposit has to be repaid.
(3) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to repayment of any loan, deposit, or
specified advance taken or accepted from—
(a) Government;
(b) any banking company, post office savings bank, or co-operative bank;

5

(c) any corporation established by a Central, State, or Provincial Act;
(d) any Government company as defined in section 2 (45) of the
Companies Act, 2013;

10 18 of 2013.

(e) any institution, association, or body or class of institutions,
associations or bodies notified by the Central Government.
(4) In sub-section (1), “two lakh rupees” shall be substituted for “twenty
thousand rupees” in the case of any deposit or loan where—

15

(a) such deposit is paid to a member by a primary agricultural credit
society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank; or
(b) such loan is repaid by a member to a primary agricultural credit
society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank.
(5) In this section, “loan or deposit” means any loan or deposit of money which
is repayable after notice or repayable after a period and, in the case of a person other
than a company, includes loan or deposit of any nature.
Interpretation.

20

189. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “banking company” means a company to which the provisions of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies and includes any bank or banking
institution referred to in section 51 of that Act;

25 10 of 1949.

(b) “primary agricultural credit society”, and “primary co-operative
agricultural and rural development bank” shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in section 149(6);
(c) “specified sum” means any sum of money receivable, whether as
advance or otherwise, in relation to transfer of an immovable property,
whether or not the transfer takes place;
(d) “specified advance” means any sum of money in the nature of
advance, by whatever name called, in relation to transfer of an immovable
property, whether or not the transfer takes place.

30

35

CHAPTER XIII
DETERMINATION OF TAX IN SPECIAL CASES
A.—Determination of tax in certain special cases
Determination
of tax where
total income
includes
income on
which no tax is
payable.

190. Where there is included in the total income of an assessee any income on
which no income-tax is payable under the provisions of this Act, the assessee shall
be entitled to a deduction, from income-tax with which he is chargeable on his total
income, of an amount equal to the income-tax calculated at the average rate of
income-tax on the amount on which no income-tax is payable.

Tax on
accumulated
balance of
recognised
provident fund.

191. Where the accumulated balance due to an employee participating in a
recognised provident fund is included in his total income, owing to the provisions
of paragraph 8 of Part A of Schedule XI not being applicable, the Assessing Officer
shall calculate the total of the various sums of tax as per the provisions of
paragraph 9 thereof.

40

45

