289

43 of 1961.

5
43 of 1961.

10

15

(h) “proceeding” means any proceeding in respect of any year, whether
under the Income-tax Act, 1961or under this Act, which may be pending on
the date on which a search under section 247 or requisition under
section 248 is authorised or powers under section 253 are exercised, as the
case may be, or which may have been completed on or before such date and
includes all proceedings under this Act or the Income-tax Act, 1961which
may be commenced after such date in respect of any year;
(i) “virtual digital space” means an environment, area or realm, that is
constructed and experienced through computer technology and not the
physical, tangible world which encompasses any digital realm that allows
users to interact, communicate and perform activities using computer
systems, computer networks, computer resources, communication devices,
cyberspace, internet, worldwide web and emerging technologies, using data
and information in the electronic form for creation or storage or exchange
and includes––
(i) email servers;
(ii) social media account;
(iii) online investment account, trading account, banking
account, etc.;

20

(iv) any website used for storing details of ownership of any asset;
(v) remote server or cloud servers;
(vi) digital application platforms; and
(vii) any other space of similar nature.
CHAPTER XV

25

RETURN OF INCOME
A.—Allotment of Permanent Account Number
262.(1) Every person who has not been allotted a Permanent Account
Number shall, within such time as prescribed, apply to the Assessing Officer for
its allotment if he fulfils any of the following conditions:—

30

(a) his total income or the total income of any other person for which
he is assessable under this Act during any tax year exceeded the maximum
amount not chargeable to income-tax;
(b) he is carrying on any business or profession whose total sales, turnover
or gross receipts are or is likely to exceed five lakh rupees in any tax year;

35

(c) he is required to furnish a return of income under section 263 for
any tax year; or
(d) he is a resident, other than an individual, which enters into a
financial transaction aggregating to two lakh fifty thousand rupees or more
in a tax year; or

40

(e) he is the managing director, director, partner, trustee, author,
founder, karta, chief executive officer, principal officer or office bearer of
the person referred to in clause (d) or any person competent to act on behalf
of the person referred to in clause (d).

Permanent
Account
Number.

290

(2) Any person, not covered under sub-section (1) may apply to the
Assessing Officer for the allotment of a Permanent Account Number after which
the Assessing Officer shall allot a Permanent Account Number to such person.
(3) Every person shall quote Permanent Account Number in all his returns
to, or correspondence with, any income-tax authority and in all challans for the
payment of any sum due under this Act.

5

(4) Every person shall intimate the Assessing Officer of any change in his
address or in the name and nature of his business on the basis of which the
Permanent Account Number was allotted to him.
(5) Every person who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar number shall quote such
number in the application form for allotment of Permanent Account Number and
in the return of income.
(6)(a) Every person who has been allotted Permanent Account Number and
who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar number, shall intimate his Aadhaar number to
the prescribed income-tax authority in such form and manner, as prescribed;

10

15

(b) if a person fails to intimate his Aadhaar number as per clause (a), the
Permanent Account Number allotted to that person shall be made inoperative in
such manner as prescribed.
(7) Every person who is required to furnish or intimate or quote his
Permanent Account Number under this Act, and who—

20

(a) has not been allotted a Permanent Account Number but possesses
the Aadhaar number, may furnish or intimate or quote his Aadhaar number
in lieu of the Permanent Account Number, and such person shall be allotted
a Permanent Account Number in the manner, as prescribed;
(b) has been allotted a Permanent Account Number, and who has
intimated his Aadhaar number as per sub-section (6) may furnish or intimate
or quote his Aadhaar number in lieu of the Permanent Account Number.

25

(8) A person who has already been allotted a Permanent Account Number
cannot apply, obtain or possess another Permanent Account Number.
(9)(a) Every person entering into such transaction, as prescribed, shall quote
his Permanent Account Number or Aadhaar number, in the documents pertaining
to such transactions and also authenticate such Permanent Account Number or
Aadhaar number, in the manner, as prescribed;
(b) every person receiving any document relating to the transactions referred
to in clause (a), shall ensure that Permanent Account Number or Aadhaar number,
has been duly quoted in such document and that such Permanent Account Number
or Aadhaar number is authenticated as prescribed.

30

35

(10) The Board may make rules providing for—
(a) the form, manner and time in which an application may be made
for the allotment of Permanent Account Number and the particulars which
such application shall contain;

40

(b) class or classes of persons who shall be required to apply for
allotment of Permanent Account Number;
(c) categories of documents pertaining to business or profession in
which Permanent Account Number shall be quoted by every person;

45

(d) the form and manner in which the person who has not been allotted
a Permanent Account Number shall make his declaration;
(e) manner of authentication of Permanent Account Number or
Aadhaar number;
(f) class or classes of persons to whom the provisions of this section
shall not apply having regard to the transactions or the circumstances.

50

291

(11)(a) The Central Government may, by notification, specify any class or
classes of persons who shall apply to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of
Permanent Account Number within such time as mentioned in such notification;
(b) the class or classes of persons in clause (a) may include such persons––
5

(i) by whom tax is payable under this Act; or
(ii) by whom any tax or duty is payable under any other law in force; or
(iii) being importers and exporters, even when no tax is payable by them.

10

(12) The provisions of sub-sections (5) and (6) shall not apply to such person
or class or classes of persons or any State or part of any State, as notified by the
Central Government.
(13) In this section,—
(a) “Aadhaar number” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in section 2(a) of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;

18 of 2016.
15

20

(b) “Assessing Officer” includes an income-tax authority who is
assigned the duty of allotting permanent account number;
(c) “authentication” means the process by which the Permanent
Account Number or Aadhaar number along with demographic information
or biometric information of an individual is submitted to the income-tax
authority or such other authority or agency as prescribed for its verification
and such authority or agency verifies the correctness, or the lack thereof, on
the basis of information available with it.
B.—Filing of return of income and processing

25

263. (1)(a) The following persons shall furnish a return of income for the
tax year under this Act, on or before the due date:—
(i) a company;
(ii) a firm;

30

(iii) a person other than a company or a firm, if his total income or the
total income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable under this
Act during the tax year, without giving effect to the provisions of
Chapter XVII-B or provisions of Schedule VIII (Table: Sl. No. 1) or deductions
allowable under Chapter IV-E (Capital Gains) or Chapter VIII, as the case may
be, exceeded the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax;

35

(iv) a specified entity if its total income without giving effect to the
provisions of section 11, exceeds the maximum amount which is not
chargeable to income-tax;
(v) a University, college or other institution as referred to in section 45(3)(a);
(vi) a business trust;
(vii) an investment fund as referred to in section 224;

40

(viii) a person who has sustained a loss in the tax year under the head
“Profits and gains of business or profession” or under the head “Capital
gains” and who intends to claim that such loss, or any part thereof, is to be
carried forward as per this Act;
(ix) a person who intends to make a claim of refund under Chapter XX;

45

(x) a person, who is a resident, other than not ordinarily resident, and
who at any time during the tax year,––
(A) holds, as a beneficial owner or otherwise, any asset
(including any financial interest in an entity) located outside India, or
has signing authority in any account located outside India; or

Return of
income.

292

(B) is a beneficiary of any asset (including any financial interest
in an entity) located outside India, except where any income arising
from such asset is includible in the income of person referred to in
item (A);
(xi) a person, other than a company or firm, who during the tax year,
fulfils such conditions as prescribed;
(b) for the purposes of this section, “due date” means the date of the financial
year succeeding the relevant tax year as mentioned in the corresponding entry of
column C of the Table below in respect of the persons mentioned in column B of
the said Table below:

5

10

Table
Sl. No.

Person

Due date

A

B

C

1.

Company.

31st October.

2.

Person (other than a company)
whose accounts are required to be
audited under this Act or under any other
law in force.

31st October.

3.

Partner of a firm whose accounts
are required to be audited under this Act
or under any other law in force; or the
spouse of such partner (if section 10
applies to such spouse).

31st October.

Assessee, including the partners of
the firm or the spouse of such partner (if
section 10 applies to such spouse), who
is required to furnish a report referred to
in section 172.

30th November.

4.

5.

Any other assessee.

15

20

25

31st July.

(2)(a) The Board may make rules providing for the prescribed form for
furnishing return of income, manner of its verification and such other particulars
including––

30

(i) the class or classes of persons who shall be required to furnish the
return in electronic form or otherwise;
(ii) the form and the manner in which the return may be furnished,
whether in electronic form or otherwise;
(iii) the documents, statements, receipts, certificates, audited reports
or any other documents which may not be furnished along with the return in
electronic form but shall be produced before the Assessing Officer on
demand;

35

40

(iv) the computer resource or the electronic record to which the return
in electronic form may be transmitted;
(b) the particulars prescribed under clause (a) may also include––
(i) income exempt from tax;
(ii) assets of the prescribed nature and value held by the assessee as a
beneficial owner or otherwise or in which he is a beneficiary;
(iii) bank account and credit card held by the assessee;

45

293

(iv) expenditure exceeding the prescribed limit incurred by the
assessee under prescribed heads;
(v) such other outgoings as prescribed;
(vi) the report of any audit referred to in section 63 or a copy thereof;
5

(vii) the particulars of the location and style of the principal place of
the business or profession and all the branches thereof;
(viii) the names and addresses of the partners, if any, in the business
or profession;

10

15

(ix) the names of the other members of the association of person or the
body of individuals and the extent of the share of the assessee and the shares
of all such members, in the profits of the business or profession and any
branches thereof.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any class or
classes of persons, from the obligation to file a return of income under this section,
subject to the conditions specified therein.
(4) Any person who has not furnished a return within the time allowed to
him under sub-section (1), may furnish the return for any tax year at any time
within nine months from the end of the relevant tax year, or before the completion
of the assessment, whichever is earlier.

20

25

30

(5) If any person, having furnished a return under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (4), discovers any omission or any wrong statement therein, he may
furnish a revised return at any time within nine months from the end of the relevant
tax year, or before the completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier.
(6)(a) Any person, whether or not he has furnished a return under
sub-section (1) or (4) or (5) for a tax year, may furnish an updated return of his
income or the income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable
under this Act, at any time within forty-eight months from the end of the financial
year succeeding the relevant tax year;
(b) the provisions of clause (a) shall continue to apply for a tax year if any person
has sustained a loss in the said tax year and has furnished a return of loss within the
due date specified under sub-section (1) and the updated return is a return of income;
(c) the provisions of clause (a) shall not apply for a tax year for any person, if––
(i) the updated return is a return of loss;

35

(ii) the updated return has the effect of decreasing the total tax liability
determined on the basis of return furnished under sub-section (1) or (4) or (5)
for the said tax year;
(iii) the updated return results in refund where no refund was due or
increases the refund due on the basis of return furnished under sub-section (1)
or (4) or (5) for the said tax year;

40

(iv) an updated return has already been furnished;
(v) any proceeding for assessment or reassessment or recomputation
or revision of income under this Act is pending or has been completed for
the said tax year;

45

(vi) the Assessing Officer is in the possession of information in respect
of such person for the said tax year regarding violation of specified laws and
the same has been communicated to him prior to the date of furnishing of
updated return;

294

(vii) information for the said tax year has been received under an
agreement referred to in section 159 in respect of such person and the same has
been communicated to him, prior to the date of furnishing of updated return;
(viii) any prosecution proceedings under the Chapter XXII have been
initiated for the said tax year in respect of such person, prior to the date of
furnishing of updated return; or
(ix) thirty-six months have expired from the end of the financial year
succeeding the relevant tax year, and any notice to show-cause under
section 281has been issued in his case, except where an order has been
passed under section 281(3) determining that it is not a fit case to issue
notice under section 280; or

5

10

(x) he is such person or belongs to such class of persons, as notified
by the Board in this regard;
(d) a person shall also not be eligible to furnish an updated return of income,
where—

15

(i) a search has been initiated under section 247 or books of account
or other documents or any assets are requisitioned under section 248 in the
case of that person;
(ii) a survey has been conducted under section 253, other than
sub-section (4) of the said section, in the case of that person; or

20

(iii) a notice has been issued to the effect that any money, bullion,
jewellery, virtual digital asset or valuable article or thing, seized or
requisitioned under section 247 or 248 in the case of any other person, belongs
to that person; or
(iv) a notice has been issued to the effect that any books of account or
documents, seized or requisitioned under section 247 or 248 in the case of
any other person, pertain or pertains to, or any other information contained
therein, relate to, that person,
for the tax year in which such search is initiated or survey is conducted or
requisition is made and any tax year preceding such tax year.

25

30

(7) A return of income furnished under this section, shall be treated as
defective if it is not in conformity with all the conditions as prescribed and shall
be dealt with in the following manner:––
(a) where the Assessing Officer considers that the return of income
furnished by the assessee is defective, he may intimate the defect to the
assessee and give him an opportunity to rectify the defect within fifteen days
from the date of such intimation or within a further period as may be allowed
on an application made by the assessee in this behalf;
(b) if the defect is not rectified within the period allowed under clause (a),
then the return shall be treated as an invalid return and the provisions of this Act
shall apply as if the assessee had failed to furnish the return;

35

40

(c) where the assessee rectifies the defect after the expiry of the period
allowed under clause (a), but before the assessment is made, the Assessing
Officer may condone the delay and treat the return as a valid return.
(8)(a) The provisions of this section shall also apply to a return of income
which is furnished in pursuance of an order passed under section 239(4)(3)(b);

45

(b) the provisions of this section shall not apply to a specified senior citizen,
as referred to in section 402(39), for the relevant tax year in which tax has been
deducted at source under section 393(1) [Table: Sl. No. 8 (iii)].
(9) In this section,––
(a) “beneficial owner”, in respect of an asset means an individual who has

50

295

provided, directly or indirectly, consideration for the asset for the immediate or
future benefit, direct or indirect, of himself or any other person;

5

(b) “beneficiary”, in respect of an asset means an individual who
derives benefit from the asset during the tax year and the consideration
for such asset has been provided by any person other than such
beneficiary;
(c) “specified entity” means––
(i) research association referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 23);

10

(ii) association or institution referred to in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 24);
(iii) person referred to in Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 2);
(iv) institution referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 25);

15

(v) any University or other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution referred to in Schedule VII
(Table: Sl. Nos. 17, 18 and 19);
(vi) Mutual Fund referred to in Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 20
and 21);
(vii) securitisation trust referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 26);

20

(viii) Investor Protection Fund referred to in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 28 and 29);
(ix) Core Settlement Guarantee Fund referred to in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 30);
(x) venture capital company or venture capital fund referred to
in Schedule V (Table: Sl. No. 6);

25

(xi) trade union or association referred to in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 31);
(xii) Board or Authority referred to in Schedule VII
(Table: Sl. No. 33 and 40);

30

(xiii) Body or Authority or Board or Trust or Commission (by
whatever name called) referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 36);
(xiv) infrastructure debt fund referred to in Schedule VII
(Table: Sl. No. 46);

13 of 1976.
45 of 1988.

35

15 of 2003.
22 of 2015.

(d) “specified laws” shall refer to the Smugglers and Foreign
Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976, or the
Prohibition of Benami Property Transactions Act, 1988, or the Prevention
of Money-laundering Act, 2002, or the Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign
Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015.
264. (1) The Board may make a Scheme for furnishing returns of income
through a tax return preparer and such Scheme shall be notified, which—

40

(a) may enable any specified class or classes of persons in preparing
and furnishing returns of income through a tax return preparer authorised to
act as such under the Scheme;
(b) may be made irrespective of provisions of section 263.

Scheme for
submission of
returns through
tax return
preparers.

296

(2) In this section,—
(a) “tax return preparer” means any individual, not being a person
referred to in section 515(3)(a)(ii) or an employee of the “specified class or
classes of persons”, who has been authorised to act as a tax return preparer
under the Scheme made under this section;

5

(b) “specified class or classes of persons” means any person, other
than a company or a person, whose accounts are required to be audited under
section 63 or under any other law, who is required to furnish a return of
income under this Act.
(3) Every notification for the Scheme referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
issued as per section 534 of this Act.
Return by whom
to be verified.

10

265. The return of income under section 263 required to be furnished by the
person specified in column B of the Table below shall be verified by the person
specified in corresponding entry in column C of the said Table:
15

Table
Sl.
No.

Person furnishing return
of income

To be verified

A

B

C

1.

An individual.

(i) By the individual himself;
(ii) where the individual is mentally
incapacitated from attending to his affairs, by
his guardian or any other person competent
to act on his behalf;
(iii) where, for any other reason, it is not
possible for the individual to verify the
return, by any person duly authorised by him
through a valid power of attorney.

2.

A Hindu undivided
family.

A company [in cases
other
than
those
mentioned at serial
numbers 4, 5,6 and 7].

25

(i) By the karta;
(ii) where the karta is absent from India or
is mentally incapacitated from attending to
his affairs, by any other adult member of
such family.

3.

20

(i) By the managing director of the
company;
(ii) where there is no managing director,
or the managing director is not able to
verify the return due to any unavoidable
reason, by any director of the company or
any other person as prescribed for
verifying the return.

30

35

40

297

A

B

C

4.

A company not being
resident in India.

By any person holding a valid power of
attorney from the company to do so.

5.

A company which is
being wound up by the
Court or otherwise, or
where any person has
been
appointed
as
receiver of any assets of
the company.

By the liquidator as referred to in
section 322(1).

6.

A company whose
management has been
taken over by the
Central Government or
any State Government
under any law.

By the principal officer of the company.

7.

A company, for which
application
seeking
corporate
insolvency
resolution process has
been admitted by the
Adjudicating Authority
under sections 7 or 9 or 10
of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016
(31 of 2016).

By the insolvency professional appointed
by such Adjudicating Authority, where—

5

10

15

20

25

8.

A firm.

Note.––“Insolvency professional” and
“Adjudicating Authority” shall have the
same meanings as assigned to them
respectively in sections 3(19) and 5(1) of
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 (31 of 2016).

(i) By the managing partner of the firm;
(ii) where the managing partner is not able
to verify the return due to any unavoidable
reason, or there is no managing partner as such,
by any partner of the firm, not being a minor.

30

9.

A limited liability
partnership.

(i) By the designated partner of the limited
liability partnership;
(ii) where the designated partner of the
limited liability partnership is not able to
verify the return due to any unavoidable
reason, or where there is no designated
partner, by any partner of the limited liability
partnership or any other person as prescribed
for verifying the return.

35

40

10.

A local authority.

By the principal officer of the local
authority.

11.

A political party as
referred to in section
263(1)(a)(iii).

By the chief executive officer of such
political party (whether the chief executive
officer is known as secretary or by any other
designation).

12.

Any other association.

(i) By any member of the association; or

45

(ii) by the principal officer of the
association.
50

13.

Any other person.

(i) By the person himself; or
(ii) by any person competent to act on his
behalf.

298

Self-assessment.

266. (1) Where, after taking into account the amounts referred to in
sub-section (2), any tax is payable on the basis of any return required to be
furnished under section 263 or 268 or 280 or 294, then––
(a) the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest
and fee payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in furnishing
the return or any default or delay in payment of advance tax, before
furnishing the return; and

5

(b) the return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of tax, interest
and fee.
(2) The amounts referred to in sub-section (1) shall be,—

10

(a) the amount of tax, if any, already paid under any provision of this Act;
(b) any tax deducted or collected at source;
(c) any relief of tax claimed under section 157;
(d) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under
section 159(1) or 160 on account of tax paid in a country outside India;

15

(e) any relief of tax claimed under section 159(2) on account of tax paid in
any specified territory outside India referred to in that section;
(f) any tax credit claimed to be set off as per section 206(13); and
(g) any tax or interest payable according to the provisions of
section 391(2).
(3) Where the amount paid by the assessee under sub-section (1) falls
short of the aggregate of the tax, interest and fee as payable under the said
sub-section, the amount so paid shall be adjusted towards the fee payable and
thereafter towards the interest payable and the balance, if any, shall be
adjusted towards the tax payable.

20

25

(4) For the purposes of sub-section (1), interest payable under section 423
shall be computed on the tax on the total income as declared in the return as
reduced by the amount of,—
(a) advance tax, if any, paid;
(b) any tax deducted or collected at source;

30

(c) any relief of tax claimed under section 157;
(d) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under
section 159(1) or 160 on account of tax paid in a country outside India;
(e) any relief of tax claimed under section 159(2) on account of tax
paid in any specified territory outside India referred to in that section; and

35

(f) any tax credit claimed to be set off as per the provisions of
section 206(13);
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (1), interest payable under section 424
shall be computed on an amount equal to the assessed tax or, as the case may be,
on the amount by which the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax.

40

(6) In sub-section (5), “assessed tax” means the tax on the total income as
declared in the return as reduced by the amount of,—
(a) tax deducted or collected at source, as per the provisions of
Chapter XIX-B, on any income which is subject to such deduction or
collection and which is taken into account in computing such total income;

45

299

(b) any relief of tax claimed under section 157;
(c) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under section 159(1)
or section 160 on account of tax paid in a country outside India;
5

(d) any relief of tax claimed under section 159(2) on account of tax
paid in any specified territory outside India referred to in that
section; and.
(e) any tax credit claimed to be set off as per the provisions of
section 206(13).

10

15

(7) After a regular assessment under section 270 or 271 or an
assessment under section 294 has been made, any amount paid under subsection (1) shall be deemed to have been paid towards such regular
assessment or assessment.
(8) If any assessee fails to pay the whole or any part of such tax, interest or
fee as per the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall be deemed to be an assessee
in default in respect of the tax, interest or fee remaining unpaid and all the
provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(9) The provisions of sub-section (8) shall apply without prejudice to any
other consequences which the assessee may incur.

20

25

267. (1) Where no return of income under section 263(1) or (4) has been
furnished by an assessee and, after taking into account the amounts referred to in
sub-section (2), tax is payable on the basis of return to be furnished by such
assessee under section 263(6), then—
(a) the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with
interest and fee payable under any of the provisions of this Act for any
delay in furnishing the return or any default or delay in payment of
advance tax;
(b) such tax, interest and fee shall be payable along with the payment
of additional income-tax computed as per sub-section (5), before furnishing
the return; and

30

(c) the return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such tax,
additional income-tax, interest and fee.
(2) The amounts referred to in sub-section (1) shall be,—
(a) the amount of tax, if any, already paid as advance tax;
(b) any tax deducted or collected at source;

35

(c) any relief of tax claimed under section 157;
(d) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under
section 159(1) or 160 on account of tax paid in a country outside India;
(e) any relief of tax claimed under section 159(2) on account of tax
paid in any specified territory outside India referred to in that section; and

40

(f) any tax credit claimed to be set off as per the provisions of
section 206(13).

Tax on updated
return.

300

(3) Where, return of income under section 263(1) or (4) or (5) (referred to
as earlier return) has been furnished by an assessee and, after taking into account
the amounts referred to in sub-section (4) [as increased by the amount of refund,
if any, issued in respect of such earlier return], tax is payable on the basis of return
to be furnished by such assessee under section 263(6) then—

5

(a) the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest
payable under any provision of this Act for any default or delay in payment
of advance tax;
(b) such tax, interest and fee shall be payable along with the payment
of additional income-tax, as computed as per sub-section (5), as reduced by
the amount of interest paid under the provisions of this Act in the earlier
return, before furnishing the return; and

10

(c) the return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such tax,
additional income-tax, interest and fee.
(4) The sums referred to in sub-section (3) shall be the following,—

15

(a) the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 266(1), the credit
for which has been taken in the earlier return;
(b) tax deducted or collected at source, as per the provisions of
Chapter XIX-B, on any income which is subject to such deduction or
collection and which is taken into account in computing total income and
which has not been included in the earlier return;

20

(c) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under section 159(1)
or 160 on account of tax paid in a country outside India on such income
which has not been included in the earlier return;
(d) any relief of tax claimed under section 159(2) on account of
tax paid in any specified territory outside India referred to in that
section on such income which has not been included in the earlier
return; and
(e) any tax credit claimed, to be set off as per the provisions of
section 206(13), which has not been claimed in the earlier return.

25

30

(5) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (3), the additional income-tax
payable at the time of furnishing the return under section 263(6) shall be equal
to,—
(a) 25% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in
sub-section (1) or (3), as the case may be, if such return is furnished after
expiry of the time available under section 263(4) or (5) and before
completion of twelve months from the end of the financial year succeeding
the relevant tax year; or
(b) 50% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in
sub-section (1) or (3), as the case may be, if such return is furnished after
the expiry of twelve months but before completion of twenty-four
months from the end of the financial year succeeding the relevant tax
year;

35

40

301

(c) 60% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in
sub-section (1) or (3), as the case may be, if such return is furnished after the
expiry of twenty-four months, but before completion of thirty-six months,
from the end of the financial year succeeding the relevant tax year; or
5

10

(d) 70% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in
sub-section (1) or (3), as the case may be, if such return is furnished after the
expiry of thirty-six months, but before completion of forty-eight months, from
the end of the financial year succeeding the relevant tax year.
(6) For the purposes of computation of “additional income-tax” under this
section, tax shall include surcharge and cess, by whatever name called, on such tax.
(7) Irrespective of anything contained in section 424(2), for the purposes of
sub-section (3), interest payable under section 424 shall be computed on an amount
equal to the assessed tax where, “assessed tax” means the tax on the total income as
declared in the return to be furnished under section 263(6),—

15

(a) after taking into account,—
(i) the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 266(1), the credit
for which has been claimed in the earlier return, if any;

20

25

(ii) tax deducted or collected at source, as per the provisions of
Chapter XIX-B, on any income which is subject to such deduction or
collection and which is taken into account in computing such total income,
which has not been included in the earlier return;
(iii) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under
section 159(1) or 160 on account of tax paid in a country outside
India on such income which has not been included in the earlier
return;
(iv) any relief of tax claimed under section 159(2) on account
of tax paid in any specified territory outside India referred to in that
section on such income which has not been included in the earlier
return;

30

(v) any tax credit claimed, to be set off as per section 206(13),
which has not been claimed in the earlier return; and
(b) as increased by refund, if any, issued in respect of such earlier return.

35

(8) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the
Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification,
issue guidelines removing the difficulty.
(9) No guidelines under sub-section (8) shall be issued after the expiration of
two years from the 1st April, 2026.

40

45

(10) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (8) shall be laid
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive session aforesaid, both houses agree in making any modification in such
guideline or both Houses agree that the guideline, should not be issued, the guideline
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that guideline.
(11) For the purposes of this section,—

50

(a) interest payable under section 423, for the purposes of sub-section (1),
shall be computed on the amount of tax on the total income as declared in the
return, under section 263(6), as per section 266(4);

302

(b) interest payable under section 425, for the purposes of sub-section (3),
shall be computed after taking into account the total income furnished in the
return under section 263(6) as the returned income;
(c) interest payable, for the purposes of sub-section (5), shall be the interest
chargeable under any provision of this Act, on the income as per return furnished
under section 263(6), as reduced by interest paid, as per the earlier return, if any.

5

(12) For the purposes of sub-section (11)(c), the interest paid in the earlier
return shall be nil if such return is an updated return referred to in sub-section (1).
CHAPTER-XVI
PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT

10

A.—Procedure for assessment
Inquiry before
assessment.

268. (1) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act, the Assessing
Officer may serve on any person who has made a return under section 263 or in whose
case the time allowed under section 263(1) for furnishing the return has expired, a
notice requiring him, on a date to be specified therein,—
(a) where such person has not made a return within the time allowed under
section 263(1) or before the end of the financial year succeeding the relevant tax
year, to furnish a return of his income or the income of any other person in
respect of which he is assessable under this Act, in such form and verified in
such manner and setting forth such other particulars as prescribed;

15

20

(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, such accounts or documents as
the Assessing Officer may require;
(c) to furnish in writing and verified in the manner as prescribed
information in such form and on such points or matters (including a statement
of all assets and liabilities of the assessee, whether included in the accounts or
not) as the Assessing Officer may require.

25

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1),––
(a) the previous approval of the Joint Commissioner shall be obtained
by the Assessing Officer before requiring the assessee to furnish a statement
of all assets and liabilities not included in the accounts;

30

(b) the Assessing Officer shall not require the production of any accounts
relating to a period more than three years prior to the relavant tax year.
(3) A notice under sub-section (1)(a) may also be served by the prescribed
income-tax authority.
(4) For the purposes of obtaining full information in respect of the income or loss
of any person, the Assessing Officer may make such inquiry as he considers necessary.

35

(5) If, at any stage of the proceedings before him, the Assessing Officer,
having regard to––
(a) the nature and complexity of the accounts;
(b) volume of the accounts;

40

(c) doubts about the correctness of the accounts;
(d) multiplicity of transactions in the accounts; or
(e) specialised nature of business activity of the assessee,
and interests of the revenue, is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do, he may,
with the previous approval of the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, after giving the
assessee a reasonable opportunity of being heard, direct him to get either or both of
the following—

45

