461

CHAPTER XXII
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTION

5

10

15

20

473. Whoever contravenes any order referred to in section 247(1)(viii) or (4)
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and
shall also be liable to fine.

Contravention of
order made under
section 247.

474. If a person, who is required to afford the authorised officer with the
necessary facility to inspect the books of account or other documents under section
247(1)(b)(ii) fails to do so, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.

Failure
to
comply
with
section
247(1)(b)(ii).

475. Whoever, fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any
person, any property or any interest therein, with the intent to prevent such
property or interest from being taken in execution of a certificate as prescribed,
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years and shall also be liable to fine.
476. (1) If a person fails to—
(a) pay to the credit of the Central Government, the tax deducted at
source by him as required by or under the provisions of Chapter XIX-B; or
(b) pay tax or ensure payment of tax to the credit of the Central
Government, as required under—
(i) Note 3 in Table in section 393(3); or

Removal,
concealment,
transfer
or
delivery
of
property
to
prevent
tax
recovery.

Failure to pay tax
to credit of
Central
Government
under Chapter
XIX-B.

(ii) Note 6 to section 393(1) (Table: Sl. No. 8),
he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three months but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
25

30

(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply if the payment referred to in
sub-section (1)(a) has been credited to the Central Government on or before the time
prescribed for filing the statement for such payment under section 397(3)(b).
477. (1) Where a person fails to pay to the credit of the Central Government
the tax collected by him as required under section 394, he shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months
but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.

Failure to pay tax
collected
at
source.

(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply if the payment of the tax
collected at source has been made to the credit of the Central Government at any
time on or before the time prescribed for filing the statement under
section 397(3)(b) in respect of such payment.
35

40

45

50

478. (1) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner to evade payment of any
tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable, or under-reports his income, under
this Act, he shall be punishable,—
(a) in a case, where the amount sought to be evaded or tax on
under-reported income exceeds twenty-five lakh rupees, with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than three months but which may extend to two years and shall also
be liable to fine,
and shall also be liable for penalty that may be imposable on him under any other
provision of this Act.
(2) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner to evade the payment of any
tax, penalty or interest under this Act, he shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which
may extend to two years and shall, in the discretion of the court, also be liable
4
to fine.

Wilful attempt to
evade tax, etc.

462

(3) In addition to the punishment referred to in sub-section (2), the person
referred to in the said sub-section shall also be liable for penalty that may be
imposable on him under any other provision of this Act.
(4) For the purposes of this section, a wilful attempt to evade any tax, penalty
or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act, or the payment thereof, shall
include a case where any person—

5

(a) has in his possession or control any books of account or other
documents (being books of account or other documents relevant to any
proceeding under this Act) containing a false entry or statement; or
(b) makes or causes to be made any false entry or statement in such
books of account or other documents; or

10

(c) wilfully omits or causes to be omitted any relevant entry or statement
in such books of account or other documents; or
(d) causes any other circumstance to exist which may have the effect of
enabling such person to evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or
imposable under this Act or the payment thereof.
Failure to furnish
returns of income.

15

479. (1) If a person wilfully fails to furnish in due time the return of income,
which is required to be furnished under section 263(1), or by notice given under
sections 268(1) or 280, he shall be punishable,—
(a) in a case, where the amount of tax, which would have been evaded
if the failure had not been discovered, exceeds twenty- five lakh rupees, with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than three months but which may extend to two years and shall also be
liable to fine.

20

25
.

(2) A person shall not be proceeded against under sub-section (1) for failure
to furnish in due time the return of income under section 263(1) for any tax
year, if––
(a) the return is furnished by him before the expiry of one year from the
end of the tax year or a return is furnished by him under section 263(6) within
the time provided in that section; or
(b) the tax payable by such person, not being a company, on the total
income determined on regular assessment, as reduced by the advance tax or
self-assessment tax, if any, paid before the expiry of one year from the end of
the tax year, and any tax deducted or collected at source, does not
exceed ten thousand rupees.
Failure to furnish
return of income in
search cases.

Failure to produce
accounts and
documents.

480. If a person wilfully fails to furnish in due time the return of total income
which is required to be furnished by notice given under section 294 (1)(a), he shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
months but which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
481. If a person wilfully fails to produce, or cause to be produced, the accounts
and documents as are referred to in the notice served on him under section 268(1)
on or before the date specified in such notice, or wilfully fails to comply with a
direction issued to him under section 268(5) of, he shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and shall also be liable to
fine.

30

35

40

45
0

463

482. If a person makes a statement in any verification under this Act or under
any rule made thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which is false, and
which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall
be punishable,—
5

10

15

20

25

False statement
in verification,
etc.

(a) in a case, where the amount of tax, which would have been evaded
if the statement or account had been accepted as true, exceeds twenty-five lakh
rupees, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six
months but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than three months but which may extend to two years and shall also
be liable to fine.
483. (1) If any person (herein referred to as the first person) wilfully and with
intent to enable any other person (herein referred to as the second person) to evade
any tax or interest or penalty chargeable and imposable under this Act in the
circumstances referred to in sub-section (2), the first person shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but
which may extend to two years and with fine.

Falsification of
books of
account or
document, etc.

(2) The circumstances referred to in sub-section (1) shall be, where the first
person makes or causes to be made any entry or statement which is false and which
the first person either knows to be false or does not believe to be true, in any books
of account or other document relevant to or useful in any proceedings against the
first person or the second person, under this Act.
(3) For the purposes of establishing the charge under this section, it shall not
be necessary to prove that the second person has actually evaded any tax, penalty or
interest chargeable or imposable under this Act.
484. If a person abets or induces in any manner another person––

Abetment
of
false return, etc.

(a) to make and deliver an account or a statement or declaration relating
to any income chargeable to tax which is false and which he either knows to
be false or does not believe to be true; or
30

(b) to commit an offence under section 478(1),
he shall be punishable,—

35

(i) in a case, where the amount of tax, penalty or interest which
would have been evaded, if the declaration, account or statement had
been accepted as true, or which is wilfully attempted to be evaded,
exceeds twenty-five lakh rupees, with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to seven
years and shall also be liable to fine;

40

(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than three months but which may extend to two years and shall also be
liable to fine.

45

485. If any person convicted of an offence under sections 476, 477, 478(1),
479, 480, 482 or 484 is again convicted of an offence under any of the said sections,
he shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.

Punishment for
second and
subsequent
offences.

464

Punishment not to
be imposed in
certain cases.

486. No person shall be punishable for any failure referred to in section 476
or 477, irrespective of anything contained in that section, if he proves that there was
reasonable cause for such failure.

Offences
companies.

487. (1) If an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well
as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.

by

4

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if the person referred in
the said sub-section proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(3) If it is proved that an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, then
irrespective of the provisions of sub-section (1), such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(4) Where an offence committed by a company under this Act is punishable
with imprisonment and fine, then, without prejudice to the provisions contained in
sub-section (1) or (3), such company shall be punished with fine and every person
referred to in sub-section (1), or the director, manager, secretary or other officer of
the company referred to in sub-section (3), shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished as per the provisions of this Act.
(5) In this section,—

5

10

15

20

25

(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes—
(i) a firm; and
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not; and
(b) “director”, in relation to—

30

(i) a firm, means a partner in the firm;
(ii) any association of persons or a body of individuals, means any
member controlling the affairs thereof.
Offences by
Hindu
undivided
family.

488. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Hindu
undivided family, the karta thereof shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

35

(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall render the karta liable to any
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(3) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a Hindu undivided family, a member of such
Hindu undivided family shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly, if it is proved that—
(a) the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of
such member; or
(b) the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of such member.

40

45
4

465

5

10

15

20

489. (1) Where during the course of any search made under section 247,
any money, bullion, jewellery, virtual digit asset or other valuable article or
thing (herein referred to as the assets) or any books of account or other
documents, has or have been found in the possession or control of any person
and such assets or books of account or other documents are tendered by the
prosecution in evidence against such person, or against such person and the
person referred to in section 484, for an offence under this Act, the provisions
of section 247(7) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to such assets or books
of account or other documents.

Presumption as
to assets,
books of
account, etc.,
in certain
cases.

(2) Where any assets or books of account or other documents taken into
custody from the possession or control of any person, by the officer or authority
referred to in section 248(1)(a) or (b) or (c) are delivered to the requisitioning officer
under sub-section (2) of that section and such assets, books of account or other
documents are tendered by the prosecution in evidence against such person, or
against such person and the person referred to in section 484, for an offence under
this Act, the provisions of section 247(7) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to
such assets or books of account or other documents.
490. (1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act, which requires a
culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the court shall presume the
existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the
fact that he had no such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence in
that prosecution.

Presumption as
to culpable
mental state.

(2) In this section, “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive or
knowledge of a fact or belief in, or reason to believe, a fact.
25

30

35

(3) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only when the
court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence
is established by a preponderance of probability.
491. (1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under
section 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 481, 482, 483, or 484 except with
the previous sanction of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner or Joint
Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner (Appeals).
(2) The Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal
Director General or Director General may issue such instructions or directions to
the income-tax authorities mentioned in sub-section (1) as he considers fit for
institution of proceedings under that sub-section.
(3) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under
section 478 or 482 in relation to the assessment for a tax year for which the
penalty imposed or imposable on him under section 439 has been reduced or
waived by an order under section 469.

40

45

50

(4) Any offence under this Chapter may be compounded, either before or after
the institution of proceedings, by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or a Principal Director General or Director General.
(5) Where any proceeding has been taken against any person under
sub-section (1), any statement made or account or other document produced by such
person before any income-tax authority specified in section 236(a) to (k) shall not
be inadmissible as evidence for the purpose of such proceedings merely on the
ground that—
(a) such statement was made or such account or document was produced
in the belief that the penalty imposable would be reduced or waived, under
section 469; or

Prosecution to
be at instance
of Principal
Chief
Commissioner
or Chief
Commissioner
or Principal
Commissioner
or
Commissioner.

466

(b) the offence for which such proceeding was taken would be
compounded.
(6) The power of the Board to issue orders, instructions or directions
under this Act shall include the power to issue instructions or directions
(including instructions or directions to obtain the previous approval of the
Board) to other income-tax authorities for the proper composition of offences
under this section.
Certain offences
to be noncognizable.

492. Irrespective of anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023, an offence punishable under section 476, 478, 479, 480, 482 or 484
shall be deemed to be non-cognizable within the meaning of that Sanhita.

Proof of entries
in records or
documents.

493. Entries in the records or other documents in the custody of an
income-tax authority shall be admitted in evidence in any proceedings for the
prosecution of any person for an offence under this Chapter, and all such entries
may be proved by—
(a) production of the records or other documents in the custody of the
income-tax authority containing such entries; or
(b) production of a copy of the entries certified by the income-tax
authority having custody of the records or other documents under its signature
and stating that it is a true copy of the original entries and that such original
entries are contained in the records or other documents in its custody.

Disclosure of
particulars by
public servants.

46 of 2023.
10

15

20

494. (1) A public servant, who furnishes any information or produces any
document in contravention of the provisions of section 258(3), shall be punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to six months and shall also be liable
to fine.
(2) No prosecution shall be instituted under this section except with the
previous sanction of the Central Government.

Special Courts.

5

495. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the
High Court, may, for trial of offences punishable under this Chapter, by notification,
designate one or more courts of Judicial Magistrate of the first class as Special Court
for such area or areas, or for such cases or class or group of cases, as specified in
the notification.

25

30

(2) In this section, “High Court” means the High Court of the State in which
a Judicial Magistrate of first class designated as Special Court was functioning
immediately before such designation.
(3) While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an
offence, other than an offence referred to in sub-section (1), with which the accused
may, under the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, be charged at the
same trial.
Offences triable
by Special
Court.

496. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023,—

35
46 of 2023.

40 46 of 2023.

(a) the offences punishable under this Chapter shall be triable only by
the Special Court, if so designated, for the area or areas or for cases or class
or group of cases, as the case may be, in which the offence has been
committed;
(b) a Special Court may, upon a complaint made by an authority
authorised in this behalf under this Act, take cognizance of the offence for
which the accused is committed for trial.

45

467

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1)(a), the court competent to try offences
under section 520,—

5

(a) which has been designated as a Special Court under this section, shall
continue to try the offences before it or offences arising under this Act after
such designation;
(b) which has not been designated as a Special Court, shall continue to
try such offence pending before it till its disposal.

46 of 2023.
10

46 of 2023.

15

20

497. The Special Court, irrespective of anything contained in the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall try an offence under this Chapter
punishable with imprisonment not exceeding two years or with fine, or with
both, as a summons case, and the provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023 as applicable in the case of trial of summons case, shall apply
accordingly.

Trial of offences
as summons
case.

498. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (including the provisions as to bails or bonds),
shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and the person conducting
the prosecution before the Special Court, shall be deemed to be a Public
Prosecutor.

Application of
Bharatiya
Nagarik
Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023
to proceedings
before Special
Court.

(2) The Central Government may also appoint a Special Public Prosecutor for
any case or class or group of cases.
(3) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor
or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section unless he has been in practice
as an advocate for not less than seven years, requiring special knowledge
of law.

25
46 of 2023.

(4) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public
Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the
meaning of section 2(v) of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, and the
provisions of that Sanhita shall have effect accordingly.
CHAPTER XXIII

30

35

MISCELLANEOUS
499. (1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding under this Act or after
the completion thereof, but before the service of notice by the Tax Recovery Officer
as per the procedure specified under section 413, any assessee creates a charge on,
or parts with the possession of, any of his assets in favour of any other person, such
charge or transfer shall be void as against any claim in respect of any tax or any
other sum payable by the assessee as a result of the completion of the said
proceeding or otherwise.
(2) The charge or transfer as referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be void if
it is made—

40

(a) for adequate consideration and without notice of the pendency of
such proceeding or, as the case may be, without notice of such tax or other
sum payable by the assessee; or
(b) with the previous permission of the Assessing Officer.

45

(3) This section applies to cases where the amount of tax or other sum payable
or likely to be payable exceeds five thousand rupees and the assets charged or
transferred exceed ten thousand rupees in value.

Certain
transfers to be
void.

