339

(i) in the case of search, on the conclusion of search as recorded
in the last panchnama drawn in relation to any person in whose case
the warrant of authorisation has been issued, irrespective of whether
or not any seizure is recorded in such panchnama;
5

(ii) in the case of requisition, on the actual receipt of the books
of account or other documents or assets by the Authorised Officer; and
(g) “undisclosed income” includes––

10

15

(i) any money, bullion, jewellery, virtual digital asset or other
valuable article or thing or any expenditure or any income based on any
entry in the books of account or other documents or transactions, where
such money, bullion, jewellery, virtual digital asset, valuable article,
thing, entry in the books of account or other document or transaction
represents wholly or partly income or property which has not been or
would not have been disclosed for the purposes of this Act, in respect of
the block period; or
(ii) any expense, exemption, deduction or allowance claimed under
this Act which is found to be incorrect, in respect of the block period.
CHAPTER XVII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN PERSONS

20

A.—Association of persons, firm, Hindu undivided family, etc.
1.—Legal representatives
302. (1) Where a person dies, his legal representative shall be liable to pay
any sum which the deceased would have been liable to pay if he had not died, in
the like manner and to the same extent as the deceased.

25

30

(2) For the purposes of making an assessment (including an assessment,
reassessment or recomputation under section 279) of the income of the deceased
and for the purpose of levying any sum in the hands of the legal representative as
per the provisions of sub-section (1), any proceeding––
(a) taken against the deceased before his death shall be deemed to have
been taken against the legal representative and may be continued against the
legal representative from the stage at which it stood on the date of the death
of the deceased;
(b) which could have been taken against the deceased if he had
survived, may be taken against the legal representative; and

35

(c) all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(3) The legal representative of the deceased shall be deemed to be an
assessee for the purposes of this Act.

40

(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (5), (6) and (7), the liability of
a legal representative referred to in sub-section (1) shall be limited to the extent
to which the estate of the deceased is capable of meeting the liability.
(5) Every legal representative shall be personally liable for any sum payable
by him in his capacity as legal representative if, while such liability remains
undischarged, he creates a charge on or disposes of or parts with any assets of the
estate of the deceased, which are in, or may come into, his possession.

45

(6) The liability of a legal representative referred to in sub-section (5) shall
be limited to the value of the asset so charged, disposed of or parted with.

Legal
representative.

340

(7) The provisions of sections 304(2) and (5) and 305, so far as may be and
to the extent to which they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this section,
apply in relation to a legal representative.
2.—Representative assessees—General provisions
Representative
assessee.

303. (1) For the purposes of this Act, “representative assessee” means—

5

(a) in respect of the income of a non-resident specified in section 9,
the agent of the non-resident, including a person who is treated as an agent
under section 306;
(b) in respect of the income of a minor or a person who is mentally ill
or of unsound mind, the guardian or manager who is entitled to receive or is
in receipt of such income on behalf of such minor or a person who is
mentally ill or of unsound mind ;
(c) in respect of income which the Court of Wards, the
Administrator-General, the Official Trustee or any receiver or manager
(including any person, by whatever name called, who in fact manages
property on behalf of another) appointed by or under any order of a court,
receives or is entitled to receive, on behalf or for the benefit of any person,
such Court of Wards, Administrator-General, Official Trustee, receiver or
manager;

10

15

(d) in respect of income which a trustee appointed under a trust
declared by a duly executed instrument in writing whether testamentary or
otherwise (including any wakf deed which is valid under the Mussalman
Wakf Validating Act, 1913) receives or is entitled to receive on behalf or
for the benefit of any person, such trustee or trustees;

20

(e) in respect of income which a trustee appointed under an oral trust
receives or is entitled to receive on behalf or for the benefit of any person,
such trustee or trustees.

25

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1)(d), a trust which is not declared by a
duly executed instrument in writing (including any wakf deed which is valid under
the Mussalman Wakf Validating Act, 1913) shall be deemed to be a trust declared
by a duly executed instrument in writing if a statement in writing, signed by the
trustee or trustees, setting out the purpose or purposes of the trust, particulars as
to the trustee or trustees, the beneficiary or beneficiaries and the trust property, is
forwarded to the Assessing Officer,—
(a) where the trust has been declared before the 1st June, 1981, within
three months from that day; and

6 of 1913.

30

6 of 1913.

35

(b) in any other case, within three months from the date of
declaration of the trust.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1)(e), “oral trust” means a trust which
is not declared by a duly executed instrument in writing (including any wakf deed
which is valid under the Mussalman Wakf Validating Act, 1913) and which is not
deemed under sub-section (2) to be a trust declared by a duly executed instrument
in writing.
(4) Every representative assessee shall be deemed to be an assessee for the
purposes of this Act.
Liability of
representative
assessee.

304. (1) Every representative assessee, as regards the income in respect of
which he is a representative assessee, shall be subject to the same duties,
responsibilities and liabilities as if the income were income received by or
accruing to or in favour of him beneficially and for this purpose,––

40
6 of 1913.

45

341

(a) the representative assessee shall be liable to assessment and any
other proceedings under this Act, in his own name in respect of that income
and any such proceedings shall be deemed to be made upon him in his
representative capacity only; and
5

10

15

(b) the tax on such income shall, subject to the other provisions
contained in this Chapter, be levied upon and recovered from the
representative assessee in like manner and to the same extent as it would be
leviable upon and recoverable from the person represented by him.
(2) If any person, in respect of any income is assessable under this Chapter
in the capacity of a representative assessee, then he shall not, in respect of that
income, be assessed under any other provisions of this Act.
(3) Irrespective of the provisions of this Chapter, the Assessing Officer may
directly assess the person on whose behalf or for whose benefit income therein
referred to is receivable, or may recover from such person the tax payable in
respect of such income.
(4) If only part of the income of a trust is chargeable under this Act, then the
proportion of income receivable by a beneficiary from such trust derived from the
chargeable part shall be determined as follows:—

20

A x C,
B
Where,—
A = the chargeable part of the income of the trust;
B = the whole income of the trust; and
C = the income receivable by the beneficiary from the trust.

25

(5) The Assessing Officer shall have the same remedies in the same manner
against all property of any kind vested in or under the control or management of
any representative assessee as he would have against the property of any person
liable to pay any tax, whether the demand is raised against the representative
assessee or against the beneficiary direct.

30

305. (1) Every representative assessee who, as such, pays any sum under this
Act, shall be entitled to recover the sum so paid from the person on whose behalf it
is paid, or to retain out of any moneys that may be in his possession or may come
to him in his representative capacity, an amount equal to the sum so paid.

35

40

45

(2) Any representative assessee, or any person who apprehends that he may
be assessed as a representative assessee, may retain out of any money payable by
him to the person on whose behalf he is liable to pay tax (herein referred to as the
principal), a sum equal to his estimated liability under this Chapter.
(3) In the event of any disagreement between such principal and such
representative assessee or person with regard to the amount to be so retained as
referred to in sub-section (2), such representative assessee or person may secure
from the Assessing Officer a certificate stating the amount to be so retained
pending final settlement of the liability, and the certificate so obtained shall be his
warrant for retaining that amount.
(4) The amount recoverable from such representative assessee or person
shall not exceed the amount specified in such certificate, except to the extent to
which such representative assessee or person may at such time have in his hands
additional assets of the principal.

Right of
representative
assessee to
recover tax
paid.

342

3.—Representative assesses—Special cases
Who may be
regarded as
agent.

306. (1) For the purposes of this Act, “agent”, in relation to a non-resident,
includes––
(a) any person in India—
(i) who is employed by or on behalf of the non-resident; or

5

(ii) who has any business connection with the non-resident; or
(iii) from or through whom the non-resident is in receipt of any
income, whether directly or indirectly; or
(iv) who is the trustee of the non-resident;
(b) any other person who, whether a resident or non-resident, has
acquired by means of a transfer, a capital asset in India.
(2) A broker in India who, in respect of any transactions, does not deal
directly with or on behalf of a non-resident principal, but deals with or through a
non-resident broker shall not be deemed to be an agent under this section, in
respect of such transactions, if the following conditions are fulfilled:—

10

15

(a) the transactions are carried on in the ordinary course of business
through the first-mentioned broker; and
(b) the non-resident broker is carrying on such transactions in the
ordinary course of his business and not as a principal.
(3) A person shall not be treated as the agent of a non-resident unless he has
had an opportunity of being heard by the Assessing Officer as to his liability to be
treated as such.

20

(4) In this section, “business connection” shall have the meaning assigned
to it in section 9(8)(b).
Charge of tax
where share of
beneficiaries
unknown.

307. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the income or any
part thereof, in respect of the person mentioned in sections 303(1)(c) and (d) shall
be chargeable to tax at the maximum marginal rate, if––

25

(a) such income or such part thereof is not specifically receivable on
behalf or for the benefit of any one person; or
(b) the individual shares of the persons on whose behalf or for whose
benefit such income or such part thereof is receivable are indeterminate or
unknown.

30

(2) The income or any part thereof as referred to in sub-section (1), shall be
chargeable to tax at the rate applicable to an association of persons, if,—
(a) none of the beneficiaries has any other income chargeable under
this Act exceeding the maximum amount not chargeable to tax in case of an
association of persons, or is a beneficiary under any other trust; or

35

(b) such income or part of such income is receivable under a trust declared
by any person by will and such trust is the only trust declared by him; or
(c) such income or part of such income is receivable under a trust
created before the 1st March, 1970, by a non-testamentary instrument and
the Assessing Officer is satisfied, having regard to all the circumstances
existing at the relevant time, that the trust was created bona fide––
(i) exclusively for the benefit of the relatives of the settlor; or

40

343

(ii) exclusively for the benefit of the members of such family,
where the settlor is a Hindu undivided family,
in circumstances where such relatives or members were mainly dependent
on the settlor for their support and maintenance; or
5

10

15

(d) such income is receivable by the trustees on behalf of a provident
fund, superannuation fund, gratuity fund, pension fund or any other fund
created bona fide by a person carrying on a business or profession exclusively
for the benefit of persons employed in such business or profession.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), where the income in respect
of the person mentioned in section 303(1)(d) consists of, or includes, profits and
gains of business, tax shall be charged at the maximum marginal rate on the whole
of the income.
(4) Where the profits and gains referred to in sub-section (3) are receivable
under a trust declared by any person by will exclusively for the benefit of any
relative dependent on him for support and maintenance, and such trust is the only
trust so declared by him, tax shall be charged at the rate applicable to an
association of persons.
(5) For the purposes of this section,––

20

25

30

(a) such income or any part thereof shall be deemed as being not
specifically receivable on behalf or for the benefit of any one person unless
the person on whose behalf or for whose benefit such income or such part
thereof is receivable during the tax year is expressly stated in the order of
the court or the instrument of trust or wakf deed, as the case may be, and is
identifiable as such on the date of such order, instrument or deed;
(b) the individual shares of the persons on whose behalf or for whose
benefit such income or such part thereof is received shall be deemed to be
indeterminate or unknown unless the individual shares of the persons on whose
behalf or for whose benefit such income or such part thereof is receivable, are
expressly stated in the order of the court or the instrument of trust or wakf deed
and are ascertainable as such on the date of such order, instrument or deed.
308. (1) The income of the person appointed under an oral trust as mentioned
in section 303(1)(e) shall be chargeable to tax at the maximum marginal rate,
irrespective of anything contained in any other provision of this Act.

35

Charge of tax
in case of oral
trust.

(2) For the purposes of this section, “oral trust” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 303(3).
4.—Association of persons and body of individuals

21 of 1860.
40

309. (1) For the purposes of this section, sections 310 and 311, an association
of persons or body of individuals shall not include a company or a co-operative
society or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or under
any law corresponding to that Act in force in any part of India.
(2) In computing the total income of an assessee who is a member of an
association of persons or a body of individuals wherein the shares of the members
are determinate and known, the share of a member in the income or loss of such
association or body shall be computed in the following manner,––

45

(a) any interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by
whatever name called, paid to any member in respect of the tax year shall
be deducted from the total income of the association or body and the balance
ascertained and apportioned among the members in the proportions in which
they are entitled to share in the income of the association or body;

Method of
computing a
member’s share
in income of
association of
persons or
body of
individuals.

344

(b) the interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration referred to
in clause (a), shall be,—
(i) added to the apportioned amount referred to in clause (a), if
such apportioned amount is a profit; or
(ii) adjusted against the apportioned amount referred to in
clause (a), if such apportioned amount is a loss,

5

and the resultant amount shall be treated as the share of the member in the income
of such association or body.
(3) The share of a member in the income or loss of the association or body, as
computed under sub-section (2), shall, for the purposes of assessment, be apportioned
under the various heads of income in the same manner in which the income or loss of
the association or body has been determined under each head of income.
(4) Any interest paid by a member on capital borrowed by him for the
purposes of investment in the association or body shall, in computing his share
chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” in respect
of his share in the income of the association or body, be deducted from his share.

10

15

(5) For the purposes of this section, “paid” means actually paid or incurred
according to the method of accounting upon the basis of which the profits or gains
are computed under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
Share of
member of
association of
persons or
body of
individuals in
income of
association or
body.

310. (1) Income-tax shall not be payable by an assessee (who is a member
of an association of persons or body of individuals) in respect of his share in the
income of the association of persons or body of individuals computed in the
manner provided in section 309, except in a case referred to in sub-section (2).
(2) Where no income-tax is chargeable on the total income of the association
of persons or body of individuals, the share of a member computed as aforesaid
shall be chargeable to tax as part of his total income.

20

25

(3) Where no income-tax is payable by an assessee under sub-section (1),––
(a) if the association of persons or body of individuals is chargeable
to tax on its total income at the maximum marginal rate or any higher rate
under any of the provisions of this Act, the share of a member computed as
aforesaid shall not be included in his total income;

30

(b) in any other case, the share of a member computed as aforesaid
shall form part of his total income.
Charge of tax
where shares
of members in
association of
persons or
body of
individuals
unknown, etc.

311. (1) Where the individual shares of the members of an association of
persons or body of individuals in the whole or any part of the income of such
association or body are indeterminate or unknown,—

35

(a) tax shall be charged on the total income of the association or body
at the maximum marginal rate; or
(b) where the total income of any member of such association or body
is chargeable to tax at a rate which is higher than the maximum marginal
rate, tax shall be charged on the total income of the association or body at
such higher rate.
(2) Where the individual shares of the members of an association of persons
or body of individuals in the whole or any part of the income of such association
or body are determinate or known,––

40

45

345

5

(a) the total income of any member thereof for the tax year (excluding
his share from such association or body) exceeds the maximum amount
which is not chargeable to tax in the case of that member under the Finance
Act of the relevant year, tax shall be charged on the total income of the
association or body at the maximum marginal rate;
(b) any member or members thereof is or are chargeable to tax at a rate
or rates which is or are higher than the maximum marginal rate,—

10

(i) tax shall be charged on that portion or portions of the total
income of the association or body which is or are relatable to the share
or shares of such member or members at such higher rate or rates, as the
case may be; and
(ii) the balance of the total income of the association or body
shall be taxed at the maximum marginal rate.

15

20

(3) For the purposes of this section, the individual shares of the members of
an association of persons or body of individuals in the whole or any part of the
income of such association or body shall be deemed to be indeterminate or
unknown if such shares (in relation to the whole or any part of such income) are
indeterminate or unknown on the date of formation of such association or body or
at any time thereafter.
5.—Executors
312. (1) The income of the estate of a deceased person shall be chargeable
to tax in the hands of the executor as an individual, if there is only one executor,
or as an association of persons, if the executors are more than one.

Executor.

25

(2) The executor shall be deemed to be resident or non-resident according
to the residential status of the deceased person for the tax year in which his death
took place.
(3) For the purposes of this section, “executor” includes an administrator or
other person administering the estate of the deceased person.

30

(4) The assessment of an executor under this section shall be made
separately from any assessment that may be made on him in respect of his own
income.

35

(5) Separate assessments shall be made under this section on the total
income of each completed tax year or part thereof as is included in the period from
the date of the death to the date of complete distribution to the beneficiaries of the
estate according to their several interests.

40

(6) In computing the total income of any tax year under this section, any
income of the estate of that tax year distributed to, or applied to the benefit of, any
specific legatee of the estate during that tax year shall be excluded; but the income
so excluded, shall be included in the total income of the tax year of such specific
legatee.
(7) The provisions of section 305 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case
of an executor in respect of tax paid or payable by him, as they apply in the case
of a representative assessee.
6.—Succession to business or profession

Succession to
business or
profession
otherwise than
on death.

45

313. (1) Where a person carrying on any business or profession (herein
referred to as the predecessor) has been succeeded therein by any other person
(herein referred to as the successor) who continues to carry on that business or
profession,—

346

(a) the predecessor shall be assessed in respect of the income of the
tax year in which the succession took place up to the date of succession;
(b) the successor shall be assessed in respect of the income of the tax
year after the date of succession.
(2) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), when the
predecessor cannot be found, the assessment of the income of the tax year in
which the succession took place up to the date of succession and of the tax year
preceding that year shall be made on the successor in like manner and to the same
extent as it would have been made on the predecessor, and all the provisions of
this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
(3) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), where
there is succession, the assessment or reassessment or any other proceedings,
made or initiated on the predecessor during the course of pendency of such
succession, shall be deemed to have been made or initiated on the successor and
all the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.

5

10

15

(4) When any sum payable under this section in respect of the income of
such business or profession assessed on the predecessor,––
(a) for the tax year in which the succession took place up to the date
of succession; or
(b) for the tax year preceding the year in which the succession took place,

20

cannot be recovered from him, the Assessing Officer shall record a finding to that
effect and the sum payable by the predecessor shall thereafter be payable by and
recoverable from the successor, and the successor shall be entitled to recover from
the predecessor any sum so paid.
(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of this section, where any business or
profession carried on by a Hindu undivided family is succeeded to, and
simultaneously with the succession or after the succession there has been a partition
of the joint family property between the members or groups of members, the tax due
in respect of the income of the business or profession succeeded to, up to the date of
succession, shall be assessed and recovered in the manner provided in section 315.

25

30

(6) In this section,—
(a) “income” includes any gain accruing from the transfer, in any manner,
of the business or profession as a result of the succession; and
(b) “pendency” means the period commencing from the date of filing of
application for such succession of business before the High Court or tribunal or
the date of admission of an application for corporate insolvency resolution by
the Adjudicating Authority as defined in section 5(1) of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 and ending with the date on which the order of such
High Court or tribunal or such Adjudicating Authority, is received by the
Principal Commissioner or the Commissioner.
Effect of order
of tribunal or
court in respect
of business
reorganisation.

314. (1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in section 263, if
prior to the date of order in respect of business reorganisation, any return of
income has been furnished under the provisions of the said section by an entity
for any tax year to which such order applies, the successor shall furnish, within
six months from the end of the month in which the order was issued, a modified
return in such form and manner, as prescribed, in accordance with and limited to
the said order.

35

31 of 2016.
40

45

347

(2) Where the assessment or reassessment proceedings for a tax year to
which the order in respect of the business reorganisation applies,––

5

(a) have been completed on the date of furnishing of the modified
return as per the provisions of sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer
shall pass an order modifying the total income of the relevant tax year
determined in such assessment or reassessment, in accordance with such
order and taking into account the modified return so furnished;

10

(b) are pending on the date of furnishing of the modified return as
per sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer shall pass an order assessing
or reassessing the total income of the relevant tax year as per the order
of the business reorganisation and taking into account the modified
return so furnished.

15

(3) Subject to any other provisions of this section, in an assessment or
reassessment made in respect of a tax year under this section, all other
provisions of this Act shall apply and the tax shall be chargeable at the rate or
rates as applicable to such tax year.
(4) In this section,—

20

(a) “business reorganisation” means the reorganisation of business
involving the amalgamation or demerger or merger of business of one
or more persons;
(b) “order in respect of business reorganisation” means an order of
a High Court or tribunal or an Adjudicating Authority as defined in
section 5(1) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016; and

31 of 2016.

25

(c) “successor” means all resulting companies in a business
reorganisation, whether or not the company was in existence prior to
such business reorganisation.
7.—Partition

30

35

315. (1) A Hindu family, hitherto assessed as undivided, shall be deemed for
the purposes of this Act to continue to be a Hindu undivided family, except where
and in so far as a finding of partition has been given under this section in respect of
the Hindu undivided family.
(2) Where, at the time of making an assessment under section 270 or
section 271, it is claimed by or on behalf of any member of a Hindu family assessed
as undivided that a partition, whether total or partial, has taken place among the
members of such family, the Assessing Officer shall make an inquiry thereinto after
giving notice of the inquiry to all the members of the family.
(3) On the completion of the inquiry, the Assessing Officer shall record a
finding as to whether there has been a total or partial partition of the joint family
property, and, if there has been such a partition, the date on which it has taken place.

40

(4) Where a finding of total or partial partition has been recorded by the
Assessing Officer under this section, and the partition took place during the tax
year,—
(a) the total income of the joint family in respect of the period up to the
date of partition shall be assessed as if no partition had taken place; and

45

(b) each member or group of members shall, in addition to any tax for
which he or it may be separately liable and irrespective of anything contained
against Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 2), be jointly and severally liable for the
tax on the income so assessed.

Assessment after
partition of
Hindu undivided
family.

348

(5) Where a finding of total or partial partition has been recorded by the
Assessing Officer under this section, and the partition took place after the expiry of
the tax year, the total income of the tax year of the joint family shall be assessed as
if no partition had taken place, and the provisions of sub-section (4)(b), so far as
may be, apply to the case.
(6) Irrespective of anything contained in this section, if the Assessing Officer
finds after completion of the assessment of a Hindu undivided family that the family
has already effected a partition, whether total or partial, the Assessing Officer shall
proceed to recover the tax from every person who was a member of the family before
the partition, and every such person shall be jointly and severally liable for the tax
on the income so assessed.
(7) The provisions of this section shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to
the levy and collection of any penalty, interest, fine or other sum in respect of any
period up to the date of the partition, whether total or partial, of a Hindu undivided
family as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of tax in respect of any
such period.

5

10

15

(8) Irrespective of anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this
section, where a partial partition has taken place after the 31st December, 1978,
among the members of a Hindu undivided family hitherto assessed as undivided,—
(a) a claim that such partial partition has taken place shall not be
inquired into under sub-section (2) and no finding shall be recorded under
sub-section (3) that such partial partition had taken place and any finding
recorded under sub-section (3) to that effect at any time, shall be
null and void;

20

(b) such family shall continue to be liable to be assessed under this Act
as if no such partial partition had taken place; and

25

(c) each member or group of members of such family immediately
before such partial partition and the family shall be jointly and severally liable
for any tax, penalty, interest, fine or other sum payable under this Act by the
family in respect of any period, whether before or after such partial partition.

30

(9) For the purposes of this section, the several liability of any member or
group of members thereunder shall be computed according to the portion of the joint
family property allotted to him or it at the partition, whether total or partial and the
provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(10) In this section,—

35

(a) “partition” means,—
(i) where the property admits of a physical division, a physical
division of the property, but a physical division of the income without a
physical division of the property producing the income shall not be
deemed to be a partition; or

40

(ii) where the property does not admit of a physical division, then
such division as the property admits of, but a mere severance of status
shall not be deemed to be a partition;
(b) “partial partition” means a partition which is partial as regards the
persons constituting the Hindu undivided family, or the properties belonging
to the Hindu undivided family, or both.

45

349

8.—Profits of non-residents from occasional shipping business

5

316. (1) Irrespective of anything in the other provisions of this Act, the
provisions of this section shall apply for the purpose of levy and recovery of tax in
the case of any ship, belonging to or chartered by a non-resident, which carries
passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India.
(2) Where such a ship carries passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at
a port in India,––

10

(a) 7.5 % of the amount paid or payable on account of such carriage shall
be deemed to be income accruing in India to the owner or charterer or to any
person on his behalf, on account of such carriage, whether that amount is paid
or payable in or out of India; and
(b) the amount referred to in clause (a) shall include the amount paid or
payable by way of demurrage charge or handling charge or any other amount
of similar nature.

15

20

(3) Before the departure from any port in India of any such ship, the master of
the ship shall prepare and furnish to the Assessing Officer a return of the full amount
paid or payable to the person as mentioned in sub-section (2) on account of such
carriage shipped at that port, since the last arrival of the ship thereat.
(4) The requirement of furnishing the return as per sub-section (3) shall be
deemed to have been complied with, if––
(a) the Assessing Officer is satisfied that––
(i) it is not possible for the master of the ship to furnish the return
before the departure of the ship from the port; and

25

(ii) the master of the ship has made satisfactory arrangements for
filing of the return and payment of tax by any other person on his behalf;
and
(b) the return is filed within thirty days of the departure of the ship by
any person so authorised by the master.
(5) On receipt of the return, the Assessing Officer shall—

30

(a) assess the income referred to in sub-section (2); and
(b) determine the sum payable as tax thereon at the rate or rates in force
applicable to the total income of a company which has not made the
arrangements referred to in section 393(1)(Table: Sl. No. 7) and such sum shall
be payable by the master of the ship.

35

(6) No order assessing the income and determining the sum of tax payable
thereon shall be made under sub-section (5) after the expiry of nine months from the
end of the tax year in which the return under sub-section (3) is furnished.
(7) For the purposes of determining the tax payable under sub-section (5), the
Assessing Officer may call for such accounts or documents as he may require.

40

45

(8) A port clearance shall not be granted to the ship until the Commissioner of
Customs, or other officer duly authorised to grant the same, is satisfied that the tax
assessable under this section has been duly paid or that satisfactory arrangements
have been made for the payment thereof.
(9) Nothing in this section shall prevent the owner or charterer of a ship from
claiming, before the end of the year following the tax year in which the date of
departure of the ship from Indian port falls, that an assessment be made of his total
income of the tax year as per other provisions of this Act, and tax payable be
determined on the basis of such assessment.

Shipping
business of nonresidents.

350

(10) In a case falling under sub-section (9), any payment made under this
section during the tax year, if so claimed, shall be treated as––
(a) tax paid in advance with respect to that year and adjusted against tax
payable by such person; and
(b) the difference between the sum so paid and the amount of tax found
so payable by him on such assessment shall be paid by him or refunded to him.

5

9.—Persons leaving India
Assessment of
persons leaving
India.

317. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 4, when it appears to the
Assessing Officer that any individual may leave India during the current tax year or
shortly after its expiry, with no present intention of returning to India, the total
income of such individual for the period beginning from the first day of that current
tax year up to the probable date of departure from India (referred to as specified
period in this section) shall be chargeable to tax in that current tax year.
(2) The total income of each completed tax year or part of any tax year
included in the specified period shall be chargeable to tax at the rate or rates in force
in that tax year, and separate assessments shall be made in respect of each such
completed tax year or part of any tax year.

10

15

(3) The Assessing Officer may estimate the income of such individual for such
specified period or any part thereof, where it cannot be readily determined in the
manner provided in this Act.

20

(4) For the purposes of making an assessment under sub-section (1), the
Assessing Officer may serve a notice upon such individual requiring him to furnish
within such time, not being less than seven days, as specified in the notice, a return
in the same form and verified in the same manner as a return under section 268(1),
setting forth his––

25

(a) total income for each completed tax year comprised in such specified
period referred to therein; and
(b) estimated total income for any part of the tax year comprised in such
specified period,
and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, and subject to the provisions
of this section, apply as if the notice were a notice issued under section 268(1).
(5) Irrespective of anything contained in section 268(1) or 280, where the
provisions of sub-section (1) are applicable, the Assessing Officer may issue any
notice under section 268(1) or 280, requiring the furnishing of the return by such
individual in respect of any tax chargeable under any other provisions of this Act,
within such period, not being less than seven days, as the Assessing Officer may
think proper.

30

35

(6) The tax chargeable under this section shall be in addition to the tax, if any,
chargeable under any other provisions of this Act.
10.—Association of persons or body of individuals or artificial juridical person
formed for a particular event or purpose
Assessment of
association of
persons or body
of individuals or
artificial juridical
person formed for
a particular event
or purpose.

318. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in the section 4, where it appears
to the Assessing Officer that any association of persons or a body of individuals or
an artificial juridical person, formed or established or incorporated for a particular
event or purpose in a tax year is likely to be dissolved in the same year or
immediately after such year, the total income of such association or body or juridical
person for the period beginning from the first day of that tax year up to the date of
its dissolution shall be chargeable to tax in that tax year.

40

45

351

(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the provisions of section 317(2) to (6)
shall, so far as may be, apply to any proceedings in the case of any such person as
they apply in the case of persons leaving India.
11.—Persons trying to alienate their assets
5

10

319. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 4, where it appears to
the Assessing Officer during any current tax year that any person is likely to charge,
sell, transfer, dispose of or otherwise part with any of his assets with a view to
avoiding payment of any liability under the provisions of this Act, the total income
of such person for the period beginning from the first day of that current tax year up
to the date when the Assessing Officer commences proceedings under this section
shall be chargeable to tax in current tax year.

Assessment of
persons likely to
transfer property
to avoid tax.

(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the provisions of section 317(2) to (6)
shall, so far as may be, apply to any proceedings in the case of any such person as
they apply in the case of persons leaving India.
15

12.—Discontinuance of business, or dissolution
320. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 4, where any business or
profession is discontinued in any tax year, the income of the period beginning from
the first day of that tax year up to the date of such discontinuance may, at the
discretion of the Assessing Officer, be charged to tax in that tax year.

20

(2) The total income of each completed tax year or part of any tax year
included in such period shall be chargeable to tax at the rate or rates in force in that
tax year, and separate assessments shall be made in respect of each such completed
tax year or part of any tax year.

25

(3) Any person discontinuing any business or profession shall give to the
Assessing Officer notice of such discontinuance within fifteen days thereof.

30

(4) Where any business is discontinued in any year, any sum received after the
discontinuance shall be deemed to be the income of the recipient and charged to tax
accordingly in the year of receipt, if such sum would have been included in the total
income of the person who carried on the business had such sum been received before
such discontinuance.

35

40

45

(5) Where any profession is discontinued in any year on account of the
cessation of the profession by, or the retirement or death of, the person carrying on
the profession, any sum received after the discontinuance shall be deemed to be the
income of the recipient and charged to tax accordingly in the year of receipt, if such
sum would have been included in the total income of the said person, had it been
received before such discontinuance.
(6) Where an assessment is to be made under the provisions of this section,
the Assessing Officer may serve on the person whose income is to be assessed or,
in the case of a firm, on any person who was a partner of such firm at the time of its
discontinuance or, in the case of a company, on the principal officer thereof, a notice
containing all or any of the requirements which may be included in a notice under
section 268(1) and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply
accordingly as if the notice were a notice issued under section 268.
(7) Irrespective of anything contained in section 268 or 280, where the
provisions of sub-section (1) are applicable, the Assessing Officer may issue any
notice under section 268 or 280, requiring the furnishing of the return by the person
whose income is to be assessed in respect of any tax chargeable under any other
provisions of this Act, within such period, not being less than seven days, as the
Assessing Officer may think proper.

Discontinued
business.

352

(8) The tax chargeable under this section shall be in addition to the tax, if any,
chargeable under any other provision of this Act.
Association
dissolved or
business
discontinued.

321. (1) Where any business or profession carried on by an association of
persons has been discontinued or where an association of persons is dissolved, the
Assessing Officer shall make an assessment of the total income of the association
of persons as if no such discontinuance or dissolution had taken place, and all the
provisions of this Act, including the provisions relating to the levy of a penalty or
any other sum chargeable under any provision of this Act shall apply, so far as may
be, to such assessment.
(2) Regardless of the generality of sub-section (1), if the Assessing Officer or
the Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) in the course of
any proceeding under this Act in respect of any such association of persons as is
referred to in that sub-section is satisfied that the association of persons was guilty
of any of the acts specified in Chapter XXI, he may impose or direct the imposition
of a penalty as per the provisions of that Chapter.

5

10

15

(3) Every person who was at the time of such discontinuance or dissolution a
member of the association of persons, and the legal representative of any such
person who is deceased, shall be jointly and severally liable for the amount of tax,
penalty or other sum payable, and all the provisions of this Act, so far as may be,
shall apply to any such assessment or imposition of penalty or other sum.

20

(4) Where such discontinuance or dissolution takes place after any
proceedings in respect of a tax year have commenced, the proceedings may be
continued against the persons referred to in sub-section (3) from the stage at which
the proceedings stood at the time of such discontinuance or dissolution, and all the
provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.

25

(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of section 302(4).
Company in
liquidation.

322. (1) Every person,—
(a) who is the liquidator of any company which is being wound up,
whether under the orders of a court or otherwise; or
(b) who has been appointed the receiver of any assets of a company,
(herein referred to as the liquidator),

30

shall, within thirty days after he has become such liquidator, give notice of his
appointment as such to the Assessing Officer who is entitled to assess the income
of the company.
(2) The Assessing Officer shall, after making such inquiries or calling for such
information as he may deem fit, notify to the liquidator within three months from
the date on which he receives notice of the appointment of the liquidator the amount
which, in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, would be sufficient to provide for
any tax which is then, or is likely thereafter to become, payable by the company.
(3) The liquidator—

35

40

(a) shall not, without the leave of the Principal Chief Commissioner or
Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, part with
any of the assets of the company or the properties in his hands until he has
been notified by the Assessing Officer under sub-section (2); and
(b) on being so notified, shall set aside an amount, equal to the amount
notified and, until he so sets aside such amount, shall not part with any of the
assets of the company or the properties in his hands.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall not debar the liquidator from parting
with such assets or properties for the purpose of––

45

353

(a) the payment of the tax payable by the company; or
(b) making any payment to secured creditors whose debts are entitled
under law to priority of payment over debts due to Government on the date of
liquidation; or
5

(c) meeting such costs and expenses of the winding up of the company,
as are in the opinion of the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner
or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, reasonable.

10

15

(5) If the liquidator fails to give the notice as per sub-section (1), or fails to set
aside the amount as required by sub-section (3), or parts with any of the assets of
the company or the properties in his hands in contravention of the provisions of that
sub-section, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the tax which the
company would be liable to pay.
(6) In relation to sub-section (5), if the amount of any tax payable by the
company is notified under sub-section (2), the personal liability of the liquidator
under that sub-section shall be to the extent of such amount.
(7) Where there are more liquidators than one, the obligations and liabilities
attached to the liquidator under this section shall attach to all the liquidators jointly
and severally.

20
31 of 2016.

(8) The provisions of this section shall have effect irrespective of anything to
the contrary contained in any other law in force, except the provisions of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
13.—Private companies

18 of 2013.

323. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in the Companies Act, 2013, where
any tax due from—
25

(a) a private company in respect of any income of any tax year; or

Liability of
directors of
private
company.

(b) any other company in respect of any income of any tax year during
which such other company was a private company,

30

35

40

cannot be recovered, then, every person, who was a director of the private company
at any time during the relevant tax year, shall be jointly and severally liable for the
payment of such tax unless he proves that the non-recovery cannot be attributed to
any gross neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs
of the company.
(2) Where a private company is converted into a public company and the tax
assessed in respect of any income of any tax year during which such company was
a private company cannot be recovered, then, nothing contained in sub-section (1)
shall apply to any person who was a director of such private company in relation to
any tax due in respect of any income of such private company assessable for any tax
year commencing before the 1st April, 1961.
(3) In this section, “tax due” includes penalty, interest, fees or any other sum
payable under the Act.
14.—Assessment of firms
324. In the case of a firm which is assessable as a firm, tax shall be charged
on its total income at the rate as specified in the Finance Act of the relevant year.
325. (1) A firm shall be assessed as a firm for the purposes of this Act, if—

45

(a) the partnership is evidenced by an instrument; and

Charge of tax in
case of a firm.
Assessment as a
Firm.

354

(b) the individual shares of the partners are specified in that instrument.
(2) A certified copy of the instrument of partnership referred to in
sub-section (1) shall accompany the return of income of the firm of the tax year in
respect of which assessment as a firm is first sought.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), the copy of the instrument of
partnership shall be certified in writing by all the partners (not being minors) or,
where the return is made after the dissolution of the firm, by all persons (not being
minors), who were partners in the firm immediately before its dissolution and by the
legal representative of any such partner who is deceased.

5

(4) Where a firm is assessed as such for any tax year, it shall be assessed in
the same capacity for every subsequent year, if there is no change in the constitution
of the firm or the shares of the partners as evidenced by the instrument of partnership
on the basis of which the assessment as a firm was first sought.

10

(5) Where any such change had taken place in the tax year, the firm shall
furnish a certified copy of the revised instrument of partnership along with the return
of income for such tax year, and all the provisions of this section shall apply
accordingly.
(6) Irrespective of anything contained in any other provision of this Act,
where, in respect of any tax year, there is on the part of a firm any such failure as is
mentioned in section 271,—
(a) the firm shall be so assessed that no deduction by way of any payment
of interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever name
called, made by such firm to any partner of such firm shall be allowed in
computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession”; and

15

20

25

(b) such payment shall not be chargeable to income-tax under
section 26(2)(f).
Assessment
when
section 325 not
complied with.

326. Irrespective of anything contained in any other provision of this Act, where
a firm does not comply with the provisions of section 325 for any tax year,—
(a) no deduction by way of any payment of interest, salary, bonus,
commission or remuneration, by whatever name called, made by such firm to
any partner of such firm shall be allowed in computing its income chargeable
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”; and
(b) such interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration shall not be
chargeable to income-tax under section 26(2)(g) in the hands of partners of
such firm.

30

35

15.—Change in constitution, succession and dissolution
Change in
constitution of a
firm.

327. (1) Where at the time of making an assessment under section 270 or 271,
it is found that a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm, the assessment
shall be made on the firm as constituted at the time of making the assessment.
(2) For the purposes of this section, there is a change in the constitution of the
firm—
(a) if one or more of the partners cease to be partners; or

40

355

(b) one or more new partners are admitted, subject to the condition that
at least one person who was partner of the firm before the change continues as
partner after such change; or
5

(c) where all the partners continue with a change in their respective
shares or in the shares of some of them.
(3) The provisions of sub-section 2(a) shall not apply to a case where the firm
is dissolved on the death of any of its partners.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

328. Where a firm carrying on a business or profession is succeeded by another
firm, except in a case covered by section 327, separate assessments shall be made
on the predecessor firm and the successor firm as per the provisions of section 313.

Succession of
one firm by
another firm.

329. Every person who was, during the tax year, a partner of a firm, and the
legal representative of any such person who is deceased, shall be jointly and
severally liable along with the firm for the amount of tax, penalty or other sum
payable by the firm for the tax year, and all the provisions of this Act, so far as may
be, shall apply to the assessment of such tax or imposition or levy of such penalty
or other sum.

Joint and several
liability of
partners for tax
payable by firm.

330. (1) Where a firm is dissolved or any business or profession carried on by
it has been discontinued, the Assessing Officer shall make an assessment of the total
income of the firm, as if no such dissolution or discontinuance had taken place, and
all the provisions of this Act, including the provisions relating to the levy of a
penalty or any other sum chargeable under any provision of this Act, shall apply, so
far as may be, to such assessment.

Firm dissolved
or business
discontinued.

(2) Regardless of the generality of sub-section (1), if the Assessing Officer or
Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner (Appeals), in the course of any
proceeding under this Act in respect of any such firm as referred to in that
sub-section, is satisfied that the firm was guilty of any of the acts specified in
Chapter XXI, he may impose or direct the imposition of a penalty as per the
provisions of that Chapter.
(3) Every person who was at the time of such dissolution or discontinuance a
partner of the firm, and the legal representative of any such person who is deceased,
shall be jointly and severally liable for the amount of tax, penalty or other sum
payable, and all the provisions of this Act, so far as may be, shall apply to any such
assessment or imposition of penalty or other sum.
(4) Where such dissolution or discontinuance takes place after any
proceedings in respect of a tax year have commenced, the proceedings may be
continued against the person referred to in sub-section (3) from the stage at which
the proceedings stood at the time of such dissolution or discontinuance, and all the
provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
(5) The provisions of this section shall not affect the provisions of
section 302(4).
16.—Liability of partners of limited liability partnership in liquidation
331. Irrespective of anything contained in the Limited Liability Partnership
Act, 2008, where any tax including penalty, interest, fees or any other sum payable
under the Act is due, and cannot be recovered, from––

6 of 2009.

45

(a) the limited liability partnership in respect of any income of any tax
year; or
(b) any other person in respect of any income of any tax year during
which such other person was a limited liability partnership,

Liability of
partners of
limited liability
partnership in
liquidation.

356

then, in such case, every such person who was a partner of such partnership at any
time during the relevant tax year, shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment
of such due amount, unless he proves that the non-recovery cannot be attributed to
any gross neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs
of the limited liability partnership.

5

B.—Special provisions for registered non-profit organisation
I.––Registration
Application for
registration.

332. (1) The following persons may, for claiming benefits under this Part
as a registered non-profit organisation, make an application for registration in
such form and manner, as prescribed, to the Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner:––

10

(a) a public trust;
(b) a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or
under any law in force in India;

21 of 1860.

(c) a company registered under section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 or
the companies registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
deemed to have been registered in pursuance of section 465 (2)(g) of the
Companies Act, 2013;

15 18 of 2013.
1 of 1956.

(d) a University established by law or any other educational institution
affiliated thereto or recognised by the Government;

20

(e) an institution financed wholly or in part by the Government or a local
authority;
(f) any person as referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 27) to
(Table: Sl. No. 29) and (Table: Sl. No. 36) and in Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 10)
to (Table: Sl. No. 19) and (Table: Sl. No. 42); or

25

(g) any other person notified by the Board.
(2) A person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be eligible for
registration, if––
(a) such person is constituted or registered or incorporated in India for
carrying out one or more charitable purposes, as referred to in section 2(23) or
one or more public religious purposes, or both; and

30

(b) the properties of such person are held under an irrevocable trust for
the benefit of the general public,––
(i) wholly for charitable or religious purposes; or
(ii) partly for charitable or religious purposes in India, if such
person was constituted or registered or incorporated prior to the
commencement of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
(3) Every application in respect of the cases specified in column B
of the Table below shall be made to the Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner within the time provided in column C of the said Table,
who shall, on receipt of such application, follow the procedure provided
in sub-sections (6) and (7) and shall pass an order within the time
specified in column D of the said Table, and registration, if granted, shall
be valid for a period specified in column E thereof.

35
43 of 1961.

40

357

Table

5

Sl. No.

Case

Time limit for
furnishing
application

Time limit for
passing order

A

B

C

D

E

1.

Where
the activities
of
the
applicant have
not
commenced
and it has not
been
registered
under
any
specified
provision at
any
time
before making
the
application.

At
any
time during the
tax
year
beginning from
which
registration is
sought.

Three
months from
the end of the
month
in
which
application is
made.

Three tax
years
commencing
from the tax
year in which
such
application is
made.

2.

Where
the activities
of
the
applicant have
commenced
and it has not
been
registered
under
any
specified
provision at
any
time
before making
the
application.

At
any
time during the
tax
year,
beginning from
which
registration is
sought.

Six
months from
the end of the
quarter
in
which
application is
made.

Five tax
years
commencing
from the tax
year in which
such
application is
made.

3.

Where
the applicant
has
been
granted
provisional
registration
and activities
have
commenced.

Within
six months of
the
commencement
of activities.

Six
months from
the end of the
quarter
in
which
application is
made.

Five tax

Where
the provisional
registration of
the applicant is
due to expire
and activities
have
not
commenced.

At least
six
months
prior to the
expiry of the
provisional
registration.

Six
months from
the end of the
quarter
in
which
application is
made.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

4.

50

Validity of
registration

years
commencing
from the tax
year in which
such
application is
made.
Five tax
years
following the
tax year in
which
such
application is
made.

358

A

B

C

D

E

5.

Where
the registration
of the applicant
is due to expire,
other than cases
mentioned at
serial number
4.

At least
six
months
prior to the
expiry of the
registration.

Six
months from
the end of the
quarter
in
which
application is
made.

Five tax
years
following the
tax year in
which
such
application is
made.

Where
the registration
of the applicant
has
become
inoperative
due
to
switching over
of
regime
under
section 333.

At
any
time during the
tax
year
beginning from
which
the
registration is
sought to be
made operative.

Six
months from
the end of the
quarter
in
which
application is
made.

Five tax
years
commencing
from the tax
year in which
such
application is
made.

10

Where
the applicant,
being
a
registered
non-profit
organisation,
has adopted or
undertaken
modification
of its objects.

Within
thirty days of
the date of such
adoption
or
modification.

Six
months from
the end of the
quarter
in
which
application is
made.

Five tax
years
commencing
from
commencement
of the tax year
in which such
application is
made.

20

6.

7.

5

15

25

(4) In case the application under sub-section (3) is made beyond the time
allowed in column C of the Table specified in the said sub-section, the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner may, if he considers that there is a reasonable cause
for delay in furnishing the application, condone such delay and such application
shall be deemed to have been made within time.

30

(5) In case the application is made under sub-section (3)(Table: Sl. Nos. 3 to 7),
and the total income of such applicant, without giving effect to the provisions of this
Part, does not exceed five crore rupees during each of the two tax years, preceding the
tax year in which such application is made, the provisions of (Table: Sl. Nos. 3.E to 7.E)
of the said sub-section, shall have effect as if for the words “five years”, the words
“ten years” had been substituted.

35

40

(6) If any application for registration is not made within the time specified in
sub-section (3)(Table: Sl. No. 3.C, 4.C, 5.C or 7.C) and the delay in filing such
application is not condoned under sub-section (4), such person shall be liable to pay
tax on accreted income under section 352.
(7) The Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall, on an application made by
an applicant in any of the cases specified in sub-section (3)(Table: Sl. Nos. 2 to 7), call for
such documents or information or make such inquiries as he thinks necessary in order to
satisfy himself as to the compliance of such requirements of any other law as are material
for the purpose of achieving its objects, and the genuineness of activities and––

45

(a) if he is so satisfied about the objects and the genuineness of the
activities and compliance of the requirements of any other law in force, shall
pass an order granting registration; or

50

(b) if he is not so satisfied, after affording a reasonable opportunity of
being heard to the applicant shall,––

359

(i) pass an order rejecting the application, where the application
was made in the any of the cases specified in sub-section (3)
(Table: Sl. No. 2 or 6); or
5

(ii) pass an order in writing rejecting the application and also
cancelling the registration in any other case specified in
sub-section (3)(Table: Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5 or 7),
and send a copy of the said order to the applicant and the Assessing Officer.

10
43 of 1961.

15

20

(8) Where an application has been made in any of the cases specified in
sub-section (3)(Table: Sl. No. 1), the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner
shall grant provisional registration.
(9) Where the registration of a person, registered prior to the 1st April, 2021
under the specified provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961 has expired and such
person makes an application for registration under this Part, the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner may, if he considers that there is a reasonable cause
for delay in making such application, condone such delay and grant registration to
such person under this Part within three months from the end of the month in which
the application is made, which shall be valid for five years from the commencement
of the tax year 2021-2022.
(10) The order under sub-sections (7), (8) and (9) shall be passed in the form
and manner, as prescribed.
333. (1) Nothing contained in section 11, other than Schedule II
(Table: Sl. No. 1), Schedule III (Table: Sl. Nos. 27 to 29 and 36) and Schedule VII
(Table: Sl. Nos. 10 to 19 and 42 to 45), shall exclude any income of a registered
non-profit organisation from its total income for any tax year.

25

(2) The registration under section 332 shall cease to operate from the date on
which the registered non-profit organisation is notified as specified in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 27, 28, 29 or 36) or Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 42), or from the 1st
day of April of the tax year for a registered non-profit organisation which claims
exemption under Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 43, 44 or 45).

30

(3) A person, whose registration ceases to operate under sub-section (2), may
apply for registration under section 332 subject to the condition that the notification
granting exemption to such person under Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 27, 28, 29 or 36)
or Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 42) ceases to have effect from the date on which the
said registration is granted and thereafter shall not be entitled to exemption under
the respective serial numbers of the said Schedules.

.

35

Switching over
of regimes.

2.––Income of registered non-profit organisation
334. (1) The Income-tax payable by a registered non-profit organisation on its
total income for any tax year shall be the aggregate of the amounts calculated––
(a) at the rate of 30% on specified income for such tax year; and
40

Tax on income
of registered
non-profit
organisation.

(b) at the rate applicable on taxable regular income and any residual
income for such tax year under other provisions of this Act.
(2) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply irrespective of anything to the
contrary contained in any other provision of this Act other than section 96 to 98.

45

335. Regular income of any tax year of a registered non-profit organisation
means––
(a) receipts from any charitable or religious activity, for which it is
registered, carried out by such registered non-profit organisation in such tax year;

50

(b) receipts, other than those specified in clause (d), whether capital or
revenue, derived from any property or investment held by such registered
non-profit organisation in such tax year;

Regular income.

360

(c) voluntary contributions received by such registered non-profit
organisation in such tax year; and
(d) gains of any commercial activity, other than the commercial
activities restricted under sections 345 and 346, carried out by such registered
non-profit organisation in such tax year, computed in such manner, as
prescribed.
Taxable regular
income.

5

336. The taxable regular income of a registered non-profit organisation for any
tax year shall be––
(a) nil, where 85% or more of the regular income for such tax year has
been applied or accumulated under section 342 for charitable or religious
purposes, in such tax year as per the provisions of this Part; and

10

(b) in any other case, 85% of the regular income for such tax year as
reduced by its application for charitable or religious purposes or accumulation
thereof under section 342 in such tax year as per the provisions of this Part.
Specified
income.

337. The specified income of a registered non-profit organisation shall mean
the income as specified in column B of the Table below and shall be taxable in the
year provided in the column C thereof:––

15

Table
Sl. No.

Specified income

Tax year

A

B

C

1.

2.

3.

4.

Any anonymous donation received by
Tax year in which
a registered non-profit organisation (other such anonymous donation
than a registered non-profit organisation is received.
created or established wholly for religious
purposes) excluding the anonymous
donations up to ₹1,00,000 or 5% of the such
donations received by it during the tax year,
whichever is higher.
Any portion of income applied by it,
Tax year in which
directly or indirectly, for the benefit of any such application is made.
related person, computed in the manner, as
prescribed.

20

25

30

Any portion of income applied by it
Tax year in which
outside India in contravention to the such application of income
provisions of section 338(a).
is made.

35

Any
investment
made
in
Tax year in which
contravention to the provisions of such investment is made.
section 350 out of any income, accumulated
income, deemed accumulated income,
corpus, deemed corpus, or any other fund.

40

5.

Any deemed corpus donation in
Tax year in which
respect of which any of the conditions such violation is made.
specified in the section 340 is violated.

6.

Any portion of accumulated income,
Tax year in which
if it is applied to purposes other than it is so applied.
charitable or religious purposes for which it
is accumulated or set apart.

45

361

A

B

C

7.

Any portion of accumulated income,
if it ceases to be accumulated or set apart
for application to such purposes as
specified under section 342(1).

Tax year in which
it ceases to be so
accumulated or set apart.

8.

Any portion of accumulated income,
if it is not utilised for the purpose, for
which it is accumulated or set apart within
the period for which it was accumulated or
set apart as specified in section 342(1).

Last of the tax
years for which income
was so accumulated or
set apart.

9.

Any portion of accumulated income,
if it is credited or paid to any other
registered non-profit organisation.

Tax year in which
it is so credited or paid.

10.

Any income applied to purposes
Tax year in which
other than charitable or religious purposes it is so applied.
for which it is registered.

11.

Any income determined by the
Assessing Officer under section 344 in
excess of income shown in the books of
account of such business undertaking.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Tax year to which
such income relates.

338. While computing the regular income of a registered non-profit
organisation, the following income shall not be included:––
(a) income applied outside India, where the Board, by general or special
order, directs that such income shall not be so included in its total income in
case of a registered non-profit organisation––
(i) created before the 1st April, 1952 for charitable or religious
purposes; or
(ii) created on or after the 1st April, 1952 for charitable purposes
where such application of income outside India tends to promote
international welfare in which India is interested;
(b) the corpus donation received by the registered non-profit
organisation under section 339.
339. Corpus donation means any donation made with a specific direction by
the donor that it shall form part of the corpus of the registered non-profit
organisation where such donation is invested or deposited in any of the modes
permitted under section 350 maintained specifically for such corpus.
340. Where the property of a registered non-profit organisation includes any
temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or other place notified under
section 133(1)(b)(vii), any sum or sums received by such registered non-profit
organisation as donation for the purpose of renovation or repair of such temple,
mosque, gurdwara, church or other place, may, at its option, be deemed as forming
part of the corpus under section 339, if it—
(a) maintains such corpus as separate identifiable;
(b) applies such corpus only for the purpose for which the contribution
was made;
(c) invests or deposits such corpus in any of the modes permitted under
section 350; and
(d) does not apply such corpus for making donation to any person.
341. (1) The following sums shall be allowed as application of income to a
registered non-profit organisation:––
(a) any sum applied by it for charitable or religious purpose in India for
which it is registered where such sum is,––

Income not to be
included in
regular income.

Corpus donation.

Deemed corpus
donation.

Application of
income.

362

(i) paid during such tax year; and
(ii) such payment is allowable under sections 36(4), (5), (6) and
(7) and 35(b)(i);
(b) 85% of the sum paid by way of donation made to any other registered
non-profit organisation; and

5

(c) nil, with respect to any sum paid as a corpus donation to any other
registered non-profit organisation.
(2) The application of income under sub-section (1) shall include the
following:––
(a) the amount invested or deposited back during the tax year, in the
modes permitted under section 350 maintained specifically for such corpus,
if––
(i) such investment or depositing back is made within five years
from the end of the tax year in which such application of income was
made from the corpus; and

10

15

(ii) the application of income from the corpus is made after the
31st March, 2021 and there was no violation of any provision of this
Part, or any corresponding provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961 with
respect to such application;
(b) the amount repaid, during the tax year, towards any loan or
borrowing where,––

43 of 1961.

20

(i) such repayment is within five years from the end of the tax year
in which such application of income was made from the loan or
borrowing; and
(ii) the application of income from the loan or borrowing is made
after the 31st March, 2021 and there was no violation of any provision
of this Part, or any corresponding provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961
with respect to such application.
(3) The following claims shall not be allowed as application of income under
sub-sections (1) and (2):––

25
43 of 1961.

30

(a) the deduction or allowance by way of depreciation or otherwise
claimed in respect of an asset acquisition of which has been claimed as an
application of income in the same or any other tax year under this Part or under
any corresponding provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961; or
(b) a claim of set off or deduction or allowance of any excess application
of any of the years preceding the tax year.

43 of 1961.
35

(4) An application from corpus, loan or borrowing, accumulated income,
specified income or deemed accumulated income shall not be considered as
application for the purpose of sub-sections (1) and (2).
Accumulated
income.

342. (1) A registered non-profit organisation may accumulate or set apart any
part of its regular income during any tax year by furnishing a statement to the
Assessing Officer in such form and manner, as prescribed, on or before the due date
specified in section 263(1) for furnishing the return of income for such tax year
stating therein the purpose and period, not exceeding five years, for which the
income is being accumulated or set apart.

40

45

363

(2) The amount credited or paid by a registered non-profit organisation to any
other registered non-profit organisation out of its income accumulated or set apart,
shall not be treated as application of income.
5

(3) The period during which the income is not be applied for the purpose for
which it is so accumulated or set apart pursuant to an order or injunction of any
court, shall be excluded from said period of five years.
(4) The income accumulated or set apart under sub-section (1) shall be
invested or deposited in any of the modes permitted under section 350, or applied
for the purposes as stated in the prescribed form referred to in sub-section (1).

10

15

20

(5) The registered non-profit organisation may, for the change of purpose for
which income has been accumulated or set apart, make an application to the
Assessing Officer, in such form and manner, as prescribed.
(6) The Assessing Officer may, on an application under sub-section (5) and
subject to sub-section (2), allow the registered non-profit organisation to apply its
income for such other charitable or religious purposes in India which are in
conformity with its objects.
(7) Where a registered non-profit organisation is dissolved, the Assessing
Officer may, on an application made by such registered non-profit organisation in
such form and manner, as prescribed, allow application of such income to be made
to any other registered non-profit organisation for the year in which it is dissolved.
343. (1) The regular income, as reduced by the application of income and
accumulated income under section 342, to the extent of 15% of regular income, shall
be considered as deemed accumulated income and shall be invested or deposited in
any of the modes permitted under section 350.

25

Deemed
accumulated
income.

(2) The deemed accumulated income under this section shall not be considered
as accumulated income for the purposes of section 342.
3.––Commercial activities by registered non-profit organisation

30

35

344. Where the property held by a registered non-profit organisation includes
a business undertaking, and where a claim is made that the income of any such
undertaking is eligible for benefits under this Part, then the Assessing Officer shall
have the power to determine the income of such business undertaking as per the
provisions of this Act.

Business
undertaking
held as
property.

345. No registered non-profit organisation, other than a registered non-profit
organisation, carrying out advancement of any other object of general public utility,
shall carry out any commercial activity unless—

Restriction on
commercial
activities by a
registered
non-profit
organisation.

(a) such commercial activity is incidental to the attainment of the
objectives of the registered non-profit organisation; and
(b) separate books of account are maintained for such activities.
40

346. No registered non-profit organisation, carrying out advancement of any
other object of general public utility, shall carry out any commercial activity
unless,—
(a) such commercial activity is undertaken in the course of actual
carrying out of advancement of any object of the general public utility;

45

(b) the aggregate receipts from such commercial activity or activities do
not exceed 20% of the total receipts of such registered non-profit organisation
of the relevant tax year; and

Restriction on
commercial
activities by
registered
non-profit
organisation,
carrying out
advancement of
any other object
of general public
utility.

364

(c) separate books of account are maintained by such registered
non-profit organisation for such activities.
4.––Compliances
Books of
account.

347. Where the total income of a registered non-profit organisation, without
giving effect to the provisions of this Part, exceeds the maximum amount which is
not chargeable to income-tax in any tax year, such registered non-profit organisation
shall be required to keep and maintain the books of account and other documents in
such form and manner and at such place, as prescribed.

Audit.

348. Where the total income of a registered non-profit organisation, without
giving effect to the provisions of this Part, exceeds the maximum amount which is
not chargeable to income-tax in any tax year, the accounts of such registered
non-profit organisation for that tax year shall be audited by an accountant and the
person in receipt of the income shall be required to furnish a report of an audit of
such income by such date in the prescribed form, duly signed and verified by such
accountant and setting forth such particulars, as prescribed.

Return of
income.

Permitted modes
of investment.

349. Where the total income of a registered non-profit organisation, without
giving effect to the provisions of this Part, exceeds the maximum amount which is
not chargeable to income-tax in any tax year, it shall furnish the return of income
for such tax year as per the provisions of section 263(1)(a)(iii), within the time limit
allowed under sub-section (1)(b) of that section.

5

10

15

20

350. (1) The modes of investing or depositing the money under this Part, shall
be such as specified in Schedule XVI.
(2) The modes of investing or depositing money under this Part, other than the
modes specified in Schedule XVI, shall be specified by the Central Government, by
notification.

25

5.––Violations
Specified
violation.

351. (1) The following shall constitute specified violation by a registered
non-profit organisation:––
(a) where any income of the registered non-profit organisation has been
applied, other than for its objects; or

30

(b) it carries out any commercial activity in contravention of the
provisions of section 345; or
(c) where it has applied any part of its total income for private religious
purposes, which does not enure for the benefit of the public; or
(d) where a registered non-profit organisation, created or established
after the commencement of this Act for charitable purpose, has applied any
part of its income for the benefit of any particular religious community or caste
other than the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or backward classes
or women and children; or

35

(e) where any activity being carried out by the registered non-profit
organisation is not genuine or is not being carried out in accordance with all
or any of the conditions subject to which it was registered; or

40

(f) the registered non-profit organisation has not complied with the
requirements under section 332(7) and the order, direction or decree, holding
that such non-compliance has occurred, has either not been disputed, or has
attained finality; or
(g) the application referred to in section 332(1) contains any false or
incorrect information.

45

365

(2) Where during any tax year,––
(a) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner has noticed occurrence
of one or more specified violations;
5

(b) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner has received a reference
from the Assessing Officer under section 270(13) for any tax year; or
(c) a registered non-profit organisation has been selected as per the risk
management strategy formulated by the Board,
the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall—

10

(i) call for such documents or information from the registered non-profit
organisation, or make such inquiry as he thinks necessary in order to satisfy
himself about the occurrence of any specified violation;
(ii) pass an order,––

15

20

(A) either cancelling the registration of such registered non-profit
organisation, after affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard, for
such tax year during which such specified violation took place and all
subsequent tax years, if he is satisfied that one or more specified
violations have taken place; or
(B) not cancelling the registration of such registered non-profit
organisation, if he is not satisfied about the occurrence of any specified
violation; and
(iii) forward a copy of the order passed under clause (ii) to the Assessing
Officer and such registered non-profit organisation.

25

30

(3) The order under sub-section (2)(ii), shall be passed before the expiry of six
months, calculated from the end of the quarter in which the first notice is issued by
the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, calling for any document or
information, or for making any inquiry, under clause (i) of the said sub-section.
352. (1) Every specified person shall, in addition to the income-tax chargeable
in respect of his total income, be liable to pay additional income-tax on accreted
income at the maximum marginal rate in any of the cases specified in column B of
the Table in sub-section (5).
(2) The Assessing Officer shall compute the accreted income on the date,
specified in column C of the Table in sub-section (5) and after affording a reasonable
opportunity of being heard to the assessee, pass on order that such income shall be
charged to tax under sub-section (1).

35

(3) The accreted income referred to in sub-section (1) shall be computed using
the following formula:––
A = B-C
where,––
A = Accreted income;

40

45

B = Aggregate fair market value of the total assets of the specified
person, as on the date specified, in column C of the Table in
sub-section (5), computed in accordance with such method of valuation,
as prescribed;
C = Total liability of such specified person, as on the date specified
in column C of the said Table, computed in accordance with such
method of valuation, as prescribed.

Tax on accreted
income.

366

(4) The accreted income, computed as per the provisions of sub-section (3)
shall be reduced by such amount of accreted income as is attributable to specified
assets, and liabilities, if any, related to such assets.
(5) The specified person and the principal officer or trustee of such
specified person shall be liable to pay the tax on accreted income to the credit
of the Central Government within fourteen days from the due date specified in
column D of the Table below, or the date of order passed under
sub-section (2).

5

Table
Sl.
No.

Case

Specified date

Due date for
the payment of
tax on accreted
income

A

B

C

D

(i)
1.

2.

3.

The registration
granted to the
specified
person
under any specified
provision has been
cancelled
or
withdrawn.

The registration
granted to the
specified
person
under any specified
provision has been
cancelled
or
withdrawn.

(a)
The
specified
person
has adopted or
undertaken
modification of its
objects during any
tax year; and
(b)
such
modified objects
do not conform to
the conditions of
registration.

(ii)
The
specified
person
has
preferred an
appeal against
the order of
cancellation.

The
specified
person has not
preferred an
appeal against
such order of
cancellation.

The
specified
person has not
applied
for
fresh
registration
under
any
specified
provision
in
such tax year.

10

15

The date of
the
order
cancelling the
registration.

The date of
the
order
cancelling the
registration.

The date of
adoption
or
modification of
any object.

Date
of
receipt of the
order in any
appeal,
confirming the
cancellation of
the
registration, by
the specified
person.
The date on
which
the
period
for
filing appeal
under
section
362
against
the
order
cancelling the
registration
expires.

20

25

30

35

The end of
such tax year.
40

45

367

A

B
(i)

4.
5

(a)
The
specified
person
has adopted or
undertaken
modification of its
objects during any
tax year; and
(b)
such
modified objects
do not conform to
the conditions of
registration.

10

15

20

5.

25

(a)
The
specified
person
has adopted or
undertaken
modification of its
objects during any
tax year; and
(b)
such
modified objects
do not conform to
the conditions of
registration.

30

35

40

45

50

6.

The
specified
person fails to make
an application as
per the provisions
of––

C

D

The
specified
person
has
applied
for
fresh
registration
under
any
specified
provision in
such tax year
and
where
such
application has
been rejected
and appeal has
been preferred
against such
order
of
rejection.

The date of
adoption
or
modification of
any object.

The date of
receipt of the
order in any
appeal,
confirming the
cancellation of
the registration
by
the
specified
person.

The
specified
person
has
applied
for
fresh
registration
under
any
specified
provision
in
the said tax
year and where
such
application has
been rejected
and no appeal
has
been
preferred
against such
order
of
rejection.

The date of
adoption
or
modification of
any object.

The date on
which
the
period
for
filing appeal
under section
362 against the
order
cancelling the
registration
expires.

The period
specified in the
respective
clause
or
sub-clauses or
Table, as the
case may be,
expires in the
tax year in
which the said
application is
to be made.

The last date
for making an
application for
registration.

The end of
such tax year.

(ii)

368

A

B
(i)

C

D

(ii)

(a) sub-clause (i)
or (ii) or (iii) of the
first proviso to
section 10 (23C) of
the Income-tax Act,
1961 (43 of 1961); or

5

(b) sub-clause (i)
or (ii) or (iii) of
section 12(1)(ac) of
the Income-tax Act,
1961 (43 of 1961);
or

10

(c) as specified in
section
332(3)
(Table: Sl. No. 3, 4,
5 or 7).
7.

8.

9.

15

Where
a
specified
person
converts itself into
a form which is not
eligible for grant of
registration during
any tax year.

The date of
such
conversion.

The specified
person has merged
with any other
entity other than a
registered
nonprofit organisation
having the same or
similar objects and
the said merger
does not fulfil such
conditions,
as
prescribed.

The date of
merger.

The
specified
person has failed to
transfer
upon
dissolution, all its
assets to any other
registered non-profit
organisation within
twelve months from
the end of the month
in
which
the
dissolution
takes
place.

The date of
dissolution.

The end of
such tax year.

20

25

The date of
merger.

30

[

35

The date on
which
such
period
of
twelve months
expires.

40

45

369

5

(6) The payment of tax on the accreted income by the specified person under
this section shall be deemed as the final payment of tax in respect of the said income
and no further credit therefor shall be claimed by, or any deduction be allowed to,
the specified person or any other person in respect of the amount of tax so paid under
any other provision of this Act.

10

(7) Where the specified person, or the principal officer or trustee of such
specified person, fails to pay the whole or any part of the tax on the accreted income
within the time allowed under sub-section (5), such specified person, principal
officer or trustee shall be liable to pay simple interest, computed as per the following
formula:––
I = 1% of (T*P)
where,––
I = interest;
T = tax on accreted income; and

15

20

P = number of months beginning on the date immediately
after the last date on which such tax was payable and ending with
the date on which the tax is actually paid including part thereof.
(8) All the provisions of this Act shall apply for the collection and recovery of
income-tax in respect of the amount of tax payable by the specified person, principal
officer or trustee and the following persons shall be deemed to be assessee in default:––
(a) the specified person and principal officer or the trustee of such
specified person;

25

(b) the person to whom any asset forming part of the computation of
accreted income under sub-section (3) has been transferred, where the tax on
accreted income is payable under the cases specified in sub-section (5)
(Table: Sl. No. 9).
(9) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (8), the liability of the person
referred to in clause (b) of the said sub-section shall be limited to the extent to which
the asset received by him is capable of meeting the liability.

30

353. (1) Where any registered non-profit organisation––
(a) fails to maintain books of account under section 347; or
(b) fails to get books of account audited under section 348; or
(c) fails to furnish its return of income under section 349; or

35

(d) any registered non-profit organisation, carrying out advancement of
any other object of general public utility, carries out any commercial activity
in contravention of the provisions of section 346,
during any tax year, its regular income for such tax year as reduced by the expenditure
referred to in sub-section (3) shall be taxable regular income which shall be chargeable
to tax as per the provisions of section 334.

40

(2) In addition to the tax referred to in sub-section (1), the specified income
and residual income of the registered non-profit organisation shall also be
chargeable to tax under the provisions of section 334, to the extent not covered under
taxable regular income under the said sub-section, and the provisions of section 338
shall not apply.

45

(3) The expenditure referred in sub-section (1) shall be computed subject to
the following conditions:––
(a) capital expenditure shall not be allowed;

Other violations.

370

(b) such expenditure shall be incurred in India;
(c) such expenditure shall be for the objects of the registered
non-profit organisation;
(d) such expenditure is not made from the corpus standing to the credit
of the registered non-profit organisation as on the end of the tax year
immediately preceding the tax year for which income is being computed;

5

(e) such expenditure is not out of any loan or borrowing;
(f) the claim of depreciation is not in respect of an asset, acquisition of
which has been claimed as application of income, in the same or any other tax
year;

10

(g) such expenditure is not in the form of any contribution or donation
to any person;
(h) such expenditure is not on account of a payment or aggregate of
payments made to a person in contravention to the provisions of
sections 36(4), (5), (6) and (7);

15

(i) such payment is allowable under section 35(b)(i); and
(j) set off or deduction or allowance of any application or
expenditure other than those referred to in clauses (a) to (i) shall not be
allowed.
Application for
approval for
purpose of
section
133(1)(b)(ii).

6.––Approval for purpose of deduction under section 133(1)(b)(ii)

20

354. (1) A registered non-profit organisation or a person referred to in
Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 1) may, for the purpose of section 133(1)(b)(ii), make
an application for approval in such form and manner, as prescribed, to the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner, subject to the following conditions:––
(a) it is not expressed to be for the benefit of any particular religious
community or caste;

25

(b) it is established in India for a charitable purpose and does not incur
any expenditure of an amount being 5% or more of its total income during a
tax year which is of a religious nature;
(c) the instrument under which it is constituted does not, or the rules
governing it do not, contain any provision for the transfer at any time of the
whole or any part of its assets for any purpose other than a charitable
purpose;

30

(d) it maintains regular accounts of its receipts and expenditure;
(e) it prepares such statement for such period, as prescribed, and deliver
or cause to be delivered to the prescribed income-tax authority or the person
authorised by such authority such statement in such form and verified in such
manner and setting forth such particulars and within such time, as prescribed;
(f) it delivers to the said prescribed authority, a correction statement for
rectification of any mistake or to add, delete or update the information
furnished in the statement delivered under clause (e) in such form and verified
in such manner, as prescribed; and
(g) it furnishes a certificate to the donor specifying the amount of
donation within such period from the date of receipt of the donation containing
the requisite particulars in the manner, as prescribed.

35

40

50

371

5

(2) The application under sub-section (1) shall be made in respect of the cases
referred to in column B of the Table below within the time limit provided in column
C of the said Table and the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, on receipt of
such application, shall follow the procedure provided in sub-sections (3) and (4),
and shall pass an order in writing within the time limit provided in column D and
approval, if granted, shall be valid for a period provided in column E of the said
Table.
Table
Sl. No.

Case

Time limit for
furnishing
application

Time limit
for passing
the order

Validity of
approval

A

B

C

D

E

1.

Where the
activities of the
applicant have
not
commenced.

At any time
during the tax
year from which
approval
is
sought.

One
months from
the end of the
month
in
which
application is
made.

Three tax
years
commencing
from the tax
year in which
such
application is
made.

2.

Where the
activities of the
applicant have
commenced.

At any time
during the tax
year from which
approval
is
sought.

Six months
Five
tax
from the end years
of the quarter commencing
in
which from the tax
application is year in which
such application
made.
is made.

3.

Where the
applicant has
provisional
approval and
activities have
commenced.

Within
six
months of the
commencement
of activities.

Six months
from the end
of the quarter
in
which
application is
made.

Five tax
years
commencing
from the tax
year in which
such
application is
made.

4.

Where the
provisional
approval of the
applicant is due
to expire and
activities have
not
commenced.

At least six
months prior to
the expiry of the
provisional
approval.

Six months
from the end
of the quarter
in
which
application is
made.

Five tax
years
following the
tax year in
which such
application is
made.

5.

Where the
period
for
approval of a
registered
non-profit
organisation is
due to expire.

At least six
months prior to
the expiry of the
said approval.

Six months
from the end
of the quarter
in
which
application is
made.

Five tax
years
following the
tax year in
which such
application is
made.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

372

(3) Where an application has been made in any of the cases specified under
sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 2) to (Table: Sl. No. 5), the Principal Commissioner
or Commissioner shall call for such documents or information or make such
inquiries as he thinks necessary in order to satisfy himself as to the compliance of
such requirements of any other law in force, as are material for the purpose of
achieving its objects, and the genuineness of activities and––

5

(a) if he is so satisfied about the objects and the genuineness of the
activities and compliance of the requirements of any other law in force, he
shall pass an order in writing approving it; or
(b) if he is not so satisfied, after affording a reasonable opportunity of
being heard,––

10

(i) shall pass an order in writing rejecting the application, where
the application was made in any of the cases specified in
sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 2); and
(ii) in any other case, shall pass an order rejecting the application
and also cancelling the approval,

15

and send a copy of the order to the applicant and the Assessing Officer.
(4) Where an application has been made in any of the cases specified in
sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 1), the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner
shall pass an order granting provisional approval.

20

7.—Interpretation
Interpretation.

355. In this Part,––
(a) “anonymous donation” means any voluntary contribution referred to
in section 2(49)(c), where a person receiving such contribution does not
maintain a record of the identity indicating the name and address of the person
making such contribution and such other particulars, as prescribed;

25

(b) “approval” means an approval under the second proviso to section
80G(5) of the Income-tax Act, 1961or section 354;

43 of 1961.

(c) “cancellation” includes withdrawal;
(d) “donation” means any voluntary contribution received by a
registered non-profit organisation from any person;
(e) “commercial activity” means any activity in the nature of trade, commerce
or business, or any activity of rendering any service in relation to any trade,
commerce or business, for a cess or fee or any other consideration, irrespective of
the nature of use or application, or retention, of the income from such activity;
(f) “registration” includes provisional registration, provisional
approval or approval, as referred to in the second proviso to sections 10(23C)
or 12AB(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and under section 332, but shall not
include approval under the second proviso to section 80G(5) of the said Act
or section 354;

30

35

43 of 1961.
40

(g) “registered non-profit organisation” means any person having a
valid registration under any specified provision and such registration has not
been cancelled;
(h) “related person” means any of the following persons:—
(i) the author or the founder of the registered non-profit organisation;
(ii) any person whose total contribution to such registered
non-profit organisation, during the relevant tax year exceeds one lakh
rupees, or, in aggregate up to the end of the relevant tax year exceeds
ten lakh rupees, as the case may be;

45

373

(iii) where such author, founder or person is a Hindu undivided
family, a member of the family;
(iv) any trustee or manager (by whatever name called) of the
registered non-profit organisation;
5

(v) any relative of any persons referred to in sub-clause (i), (iii) or (iv);
(vi) any concern in which any of the persons referred to in
sub-clauses (i), (iii) or (iv) has a substantial interest;
(i) “relative”, in relation to an individual, means—
(i) spouse of the individual;

10

(ii) brother or sister of the individual;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the individual;
(iv) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual;

15

20

25
43 of 1961.

30

35
43 of 1961.

40

43 of 1961.
45

50

(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the individual;
(vi) spouse of a person referred to in sub-clause (ii), (iii), (iv) or (v);
(vii) any lineal descendant of a brother or sister of either the
individual or of the spouse of the individual;
(j) “residual income” means the total income, as reduced by regular
income and specified income;
(k) “specified asset” means any asset which is established to have been
directly acquired by the specified person––
(i) out of its income of the nature referred to in Schedule II
(Table: Sl. No. 1);
(ii) during the period beginning from the date of its creation or
establishment and ending on the date from which the registration under
specified provision became effective, if the specified person has not been
allowed any benefit under this Part or under sections 11 and 12 or
section 10(23C)(iv) or (v) or (vi) or (via) of the Income-tax Act, 1961
during the said period, where provisions of the first proviso or the second
proviso to sub-section 12A(2) or the eighth proviso to clause 10(23C) of
the said Act, are not applicable;
(iii) during the period beginning from the date of its creation or
establishment and ending on the date from which the registration under
specified provision became effective due to the provisions of the first
proviso or the second proviso to section 12A(2) or the eighth proviso to
section 10(23C), where provisions of the first proviso or the second
proviso to section 12A(2) or the eighth proviso to section 10(23C), of
the Income-tax Act, 1961, are applicable; and
(iv) which has been transferred to any other specified person within
twelve months from the end of the month in which the dissolution takes
place in respect of a case specified in section 352(5) (Table: Sl. No. 9);
(l) “specified person” means any person which is registered under any
specified provision at any time since its incorporation or creation;
(m) “specified provision” means section 12A, 12AA or 12AB or
section 10(23C) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 or section 332;
(n) “substantial interest”, in relation to a person in a concern, means––
(i) where the concern is a company, its shares (not being shares
entitled to a fixed rate of dividend whether with or without a further right
to participate in profits) carrying not less than 20% of the voting power
are, at any time during the tax year, owned beneficially by such person
or partly by such person and partly by one or more of the other related
persons; or

374

(ii) in the case of any other concern, if such person is entitled, or
such person and one or more of the other related persons are entitled in
the aggregate at any time during the tax year, to not less than 20% of the
profits of such concern; and
(o) “value” means the value of any benefit or facility granted or provided
free of cost or at concessional rate to any related person.

5

CHAPTER XVIII
APPEALS, REVISIONS AND ALTERNATE DISPUTE RESOLUTIONS
A.—Appeals
I.—Appeals to Joint Commissioner (Appeals) and Commissioner (Appeals)
Appealable
orders before
Joint
Commissioner
(Appeals).

10

356. (1) Any assessee, aggrieved by any of the following orders of an
Assessing Officer (below the rank of Joint Commissioner) may appeal to the Joint
Commissioner (Appeals) against––
(a) an order being an intimation under section 270(1) or 399(1), where
the assessee objects to the making of adjustments; or

15

(b) an order under section 270(10) or 271, where the assessee objects to
the amount of income assessed, or to the amount of tax determined, or to the
amount of loss computed, or to the status under which he is assessed; or
(c) an order of assessment, reassessment or recomputation under
section 279; or

20

(d) an order under section 398; or
(e) an order imposing penalty under Chapter XXI; or
(f) an order under section 287 or 288 amending any of the orders or
intimations in clauses (a) to (e).
(2) No appeal shall be filed before the Joint Commissioner (Appeals) if an
order referred to in sub-section (1) is passed by or with the prior approval of, an
income-tax authority above the rank of Deputy Commissioner.

25

(3) The Board or an income-tax authority so authorised by the Board in this
regard, may transfer—
(a) any appeal filed against an order referred to in sub-section (1) and
any matter arising out of or connected with such appeal, which is pending
before the Commissioner (Appeals), to the Joint Commissioner (Appeals); or
(b) any appeal which is pending before a Joint Commissioner (Appeals)
and any matter arising out of or connected with such appeal and which is so
pending, to the Commissioner (Appeals), regardless of anything contained in
sub-sections (1) and (3)(a),

30

35

who may proceed with such appeal or matter, from the stage at which it was before
it was so transferred.
(4) Where an appeal is transferred under sub-section (3), the appellant shall be
given an opportunity of being reheard.
(5) For the disposal of appeal under this section, the Central Government may
notify a scheme, so as to dispose of appeals in an expedient manner with transparency
and accountability, by eliminating the interface between the Joint Commissioner
(Appeals) and the appellant, to the extent technologically feasible and direct that any of
the provisions of this Act relating to jurisdiction and procedure for disposal of such
appeals, shall not apply or shall apply with exceptions, modifications and adaptations.

40

45

(6) The Board may specify that any provisions of this section shall not apply
to any case or class of cases.
(7) In this section, “status” means the category of person as defined in
section 2(77) under which the assessee is assessed.

50

