445

CHAPTER XX
REFUNDS

5

10

15

431. If any person satisfies the Assessing Officer that the amount of tax paid
by him or on his behalf or treated as paid by him or on his behalf for any tax year
exceeds the amount with which he is properly chargeable under this Act for that
year, he shall be entitled to a refund of the excess.

Refunds.

432. (1) Where the income of one person is included in total income of any
another person under any provision of this Act, the latter shall be eligible for a
refund under this Part in respect of such income.

Person entitled
to claim refund
in certain
special cases.

(2) Where a person is unable to claim or receive a refund due to him on account
of death, incapacity, insolvency, liquidation or other cause, his legal representative
or the trustee or guardian or receiver, shall be entitled to claim or receive such refund
for the benefit of such person or his estate.
433. Every claim for refund under this Part shall be made by furnishing return
as per section 263.
434. (1) Where,––
(a) under an agreement or other arrangement, in writing, the tax deductible
on any income, other than interest in section 393(2) (Table: Sl. No. 17), is to be
borne by the person by whom the income is payable; and

20

Form of claim
for refund and
limitation.
Refund for
denying
liability to
deduct tax in
certain cases.

(b) such person having paid such tax to the credit of the Central
Government claims that no tax was required to be deducted on such income,
he may, within thirty days from the date of payment of such tax, file an application
before the Assessing Officer for refund of such tax in such form and such manner,
as prescribed.

25

(2) The Assessing Officer shall, by an order in writing, allow or reject the
application.
(3) No application under sub-section (1) shall be rejected unless an
opportunity of being heard has been given to the applicant.

30

(4) The Assessing Officer may, before passing an order under sub-section (2),
make such inquiry as he considers necessary.
(5) The order under sub-section (2) shall be passed within six months from the
end of the month in which application under sub-section (1) is received.

35

435. (1) Where, as a result of any order passed in appeal or other proceeding
under this Act, refund of any amount becomes due to the assessee, the Assessing
Officer shall, except as otherwise provided in this Act, refund the amount to the
assessee without his having to make any claim in that behalf.

Refund on
appeal, etc.

(2) Where, by the order as referred to in sub-section (1),—

40

(a) an assessment is set aside or cancelled and an order of fresh
assessment is directed to be made, the refund, if any, shall become due only
on the making of such fresh assessment;
(b) the assessment is annulled, the refund shall become due only of the
amount, if any, of the tax paid in excess of the tax chargeable on the total
income returned by the assessee.

45

436. In a claim under this part, it shall not be open to the assessee to question
the correctness of any assessment, or other matter decided which has become final
and conclusive, or ask for a review of the aforesaid assessment or matter; and the
assessee shall not be entitled to any relief on such claim except refund of tax wrongly
paid or paid in excess.

Correctness of
assessment not
to be
questioned.

446

Interest on
refunds.

437. (1) Where a refund is due to the assessee under this Act, he shall, subject
to the provisions of this section, be entitled to receive, in addition to the refund,
simple interest thereon calculated at the rate of 0.5% for each month (or part of a
month), in the circumstances specified in column B of the Table below, for the
period specified in column C of the said Table.

5

TABLE
Sl. No.

Circumstances

Period

A

B

C

1.

Such refund is out of—

(a) From the first day of April
following the tax year to the date the
refund is granted, where the income-tax
return has been furnished on or before
the due date as specified in section
263(1);

(a) tax collected at
source
under
section 394; or
(b) paid by way of
advance tax; or
(c) treated as paid
under section 390(5),
during the year.

2.

3.

Where the refund is out of
any
tax
paid
under
section 266.
Any other case.

(b) from the date of furnishing the
income-tax return to the date on which
the refund is granted; in any other case.

from the date of furnishing of return
of income or payment of tax, whichever
is later, to the date on which the refund
is granted.
from the date or, as the case may be,
dates on which the amount of tax or
penalty specified in the notice of
demand issued under section 289 is paid
in excess of such demand to the date on
which the refund is granted.

(2) No interest shall be payable under sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 1 or 2),
if the amount of refund is less than 10% of the tax as determined under section
270(1) or on regular assessment.
(3) Where refund, mentioned in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 1), arises as a
result of an order passed by the Assessing Officer in consequence of an application
made by the assessee under section 288 (Table: Sl. No. 11), such interest shall be
calculated at the rate of 0.5% for every month or part of a month comprised in the
period from the date of such application to the date on which the refund is granted
(4) In a case where a refund arises as a result of giving effect to an order under
section 359 or 363 or 365(10) or 368 or 377 or 378, wholly or partly, otherwise than
by making a fresh assessment or reassessment, the assessee shall be entitled to
receive an additional interest which shall be––

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

(a) over and above the interest payable under sub-section (1) or (3); and
(b) computed on such amount of refund calculated at the rate of 3% per
annum, for the period beginning from the date following the date of expiry of
the time allowed under section 286(1) (Table: Sl. No. 10) to the date on which
the refund is granted.

50

447

5

10

(5) For the purposes of sub-section (4)(b), in a case where proceedings for
assessment or reassessment is pending, in computing the period for determining the
additional interest payable, the period beginning from the date on which such refund
is withheld by the Assessing Officer as per and subject to provisions of
section 438(3) and ending with the date on which such assessment or reassessment
is made, shall be excluded.
(6) Where refund of any amount becomes due to the deductor in respect of any
amount paid to the credit of the Central Government under Chapter XIX-B, such
deductor shall be entitled to receive, in addition to the said amount, simple interest
thereon calculated at the rate of 0.5% for every month or part of a month comprised
in the period, from the date on which—
(a) claim for refund is made in the form as prescribed; or
(b) tax is paid, where refund arises on account of giving effect to an order
under section 359 or 363 or 365(10) or 368,

15

to the date on which the refund is granted.
(7) If the proceedings resulting in the refund are delayed for reasons
attributable to the assessee or the deductor, whether wholly or in part, the period of
the delay so attributable to him shall be excluded from the period for which interest
is payable under this section.

20

25

30

(8) Where any question arises as to the period to be excluded under
sub-section (7), it shall be decided by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner whose decision thereon
shall be final.
(9) Where, as a result of an order under section 270(10) or 271 or 279 or 287
or 288 or 359 or 363 or 365(10) or 368 or 377 or 378, the amount on which interest
was payable under sub-section (1) has been increased or reduced, the interest shall
be increased or reduced accordingly.
(10) In a case where the interest is reduced under sub-section (9), the
Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the form as
prescribed specifying the amount of the excess interest paid and requiring him to
pay such amount.
(11) The notice of demand under sub-section (10) shall be deemed to be
a notice under section 289 and the provisions of this Act shall apply
accordingly.

35

438. (1) Where a refund becomes due or is found to be due to any person under
this Act, the Assessing Officer or Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or
Chief Commissioner or Principal Chief Commissioner, may instead of payment of
the refund, set off the amount to be refunded or any part of that amount, against the
sum, if any, remaining payable under this Act by such person.

40

(2) Any action under sub-section (1) shall only be taken after giving intimation
in writing to such person of the action proposed to be taken.
(3) Where,––
(a) a part of the refund is set off under sub-section (1); or
(b) no such amount is set off,

Set off and
withholding of
refunds
in
certain cases.

448

and refund becomes due to a person, and the Assessing Officer, having regard to the
fact that proceedings for assessment or reassessment are pending in the case of the
person, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and with the previous approval
of the Principal Commissioner or the Commissioner, withhold the refund up to sixty
days from the date on which such assessment or reassessment is made.

5

CHAPTER XXI
PENALTIES
Penalty for
underreporting and
misreporting
of income.

439. (1) The Competent Authority may, during the course of any proceedings
under this Act, impose penalty on any person who has under-reported his income
and such penalty shall be payable in addition to tax, if any.

10

(2) A person shall be deemed to have under-reported his income, if—
(a) the income assessed is greater than the income determined in the
return processed under section 270(1)(a);
(b) the income assessed is greater than the maximum amount not
chargeable to tax, where no return of income has been furnished or where
return has been furnished for the first time under section 280;

15

(c) the income reassessed is greater than the income assessed or
reassessed immediately before such reassessment;
(d) the amount of deemed total income assessed or reassessed as per
section 206, is greater than the deemed total income determined in the return
processed under section 270(1)(a);
(e) the amount of deemed total income assessed as per section 206, is
greater than the maximum amount not chargeable to tax, where no return of
income has been furnished or where return has been furnished for the first time
under section 280;

20

25

(f) the amount of deemed total income reassessed as per section 206, is
greater than the total income assessed or reassessed under the said sections
immediately before such reassessment;
(g) the income assessed or reassessed has the effect of reducing the loss
or converting such loss into income.

30

(3) The amount of under-reported income shall be,—
(a) if income has been assessed for the first time,—
(i) Where return has been furnished, the difference between the
amount of income assessed and the amount of income determined under
section 270(1)(a);

35

(ii) Where no return of income has been furnished or if return has
been furnished for the first time under section 280,—
(A) the amount of income assessed, in the case of a company,
firm or local authority; and
(B) the difference between the amount of income assessed
and the maximum amount not chargeable to tax, in a case not
covered in item (A);

40

