302

(b) interest payable under section 425, for the purposes of sub-section (3),
shall be computed after taking into account the total income furnished in the
return under section 263(6) as the returned income;
(c) interest payable, for the purposes of sub-section (5), shall be the interest
chargeable under any provision of this Act, on the income as per return furnished
under section 263(6), as reduced by interest paid, as per the earlier return, if any.

5

(12) For the purposes of sub-section (11)(c), the interest paid in the earlier
return shall be nil if such return is an updated return referred to in sub-section (1).
CHAPTER-XVI
PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT

10

A.—Procedure for assessment
Inquiry before
assessment.

268. (1) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act, the Assessing
Officer may serve on any person who has made a return under section 263 or in whose
case the time allowed under section 263(1) for furnishing the return has expired, a
notice requiring him, on a date to be specified therein,—
(a) where such person has not made a return within the time allowed under
section 263(1) or before the end of the financial year succeeding the relevant tax
year, to furnish a return of his income or the income of any other person in
respect of which he is assessable under this Act, in such form and verified in
such manner and setting forth such other particulars as prescribed;

15

20

(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, such accounts or documents as
the Assessing Officer may require;
(c) to furnish in writing and verified in the manner as prescribed
information in such form and on such points or matters (including a statement
of all assets and liabilities of the assessee, whether included in the accounts or
not) as the Assessing Officer may require.

25

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1),––
(a) the previous approval of the Joint Commissioner shall be obtained
by the Assessing Officer before requiring the assessee to furnish a statement
of all assets and liabilities not included in the accounts;

30

(b) the Assessing Officer shall not require the production of any accounts
relating to a period more than three years prior to the relavant tax year.
(3) A notice under sub-section (1)(a) may also be served by the prescribed
income-tax authority.
(4) For the purposes of obtaining full information in respect of the income or loss
of any person, the Assessing Officer may make such inquiry as he considers necessary.

35

(5) If, at any stage of the proceedings before him, the Assessing Officer,
having regard to––
(a) the nature and complexity of the accounts;
(b) volume of the accounts;

40

(c) doubts about the correctness of the accounts;
(d) multiplicity of transactions in the accounts; or
(e) specialised nature of business activity of the assessee,
and interests of the revenue, is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do, he may,
with the previous approval of the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, after giving the
assessee a reasonable opportunity of being heard, direct him to get either or both of
the following—

45

303

(i) to get the accounts audited by an accountant, and to furnish a report
of such audit in the such form duly signed and verified by such accountant and
setting forth such particulars, as prescribed, and such other particulars as the
Assessing Officer may require;
5

10

(ii) to get the inventory valued by a cost accountant, and to furnish a
report of such inventory valuation in the prescribed as duly signed and verified
by such cost accountant and setting forth such particulars, as prescribed, and
such other particulars as the Assessing Officer may require.
(6) The accountant or the cost accountant as referred to in sub-section (5) shall
be nominated by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner for the purposes of the said sub-section.
(7) The provisions of sub-section (5) shall have effect irrespective of whether or
not accounts of the assessee have been audited under any other law in force or otherwise.

15

(8) Every report under sub-section (5) shall be furnished by the assessee to the
Assessing Officer within such period as specified by the Assessing Officer.
(9) The Assessing Officer may, on his own motion, or on an application made
in this behalf by the assessee and for any good and sufficient reason, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (10), extend the period referred to in sub-section (8) by
such further period or periods as he thinks fit.

20

25

(10) The aggregate of the period originally fixed under sub-section (8) and the
period or periods so extended, as referred to in sub-section (9), shall not, in any
case, exceed six months from the end of the month in which the direction under
sub-section (5) is received by the assessee.
(11) The expenses of any audit or inventory valuation under sub-section (5)
(including incidental expenses and remuneration of the accountant or the cost
accountant) shall be—
(a) determined by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner as per such
guidelines as prescribed; and

30

(b) paid by the Central Government.
(12) The assessee shall, except where the assessment is made under section 271,
be given an opportunity of being heard in respect of any material gathered on the basis
of any inquiry under sub-section (4), or any audit or inventory valuation under
sub-section (5) and proposed to be utilised for the purposes of the assessment.

35
23 of 1959.

40

(13) In this section, “cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in
section 2(1)(b) of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and who holds a valid
certificate of practice under section 6(1) of the said Act.
269. (1) The Assessing Officer may, for the purposes of assessment or
reassessment, make a reference to a Valuation Officer to estimate the value,
including the fair market value, of any asset, property or investment and submit a
copy of report to him.
(2) The Assessing Officer may make a reference to the Valuation Officer
under sub-section (1) whether or not he is satisfied about the correctness or
completeness of the accounts of the assessee.

45

50

(3) (a) For estimating the value, including the fair market value, of the asset,
property, or investment, the Valuation Officer or any engineer, overseer, surveyor,
or assessor authorized by him, may, subject to any rules made in this regard and at
such reasonable times, as prescribed,––
(i) enter any land within the limits of the area assigned to the Valuation
Officer; or

Estimation of
value of assets
by Valuation
Officer.

304

(ii) enter any land, building, or other place belonging to or occupied by
any person in connection with whose assessment a reference has been made
to the Valuation Officer; or
(iii) inspect any asset, property, or investment in respect of which a
reference has been made to the Valuation Officer.

5

(b) The Valuation Officer or any engineer, overseer, surveyor, or assessor,
may require any person in charge of, or in occupation or possession of, such land,
building, or other place or such asset, property, or investment to afford the necessary
facility to:
(i) survey or inspect such land, building, or other place or such asset,
property, or investment;

10

(ii) estimate its value; or
(iii) inspect any books of account, document, or record relevant for the
valuation of such asset, property, or investment and gather other particulars
relating to it.
(c) No Valuation Officer, engineer, overseer, surveyor, or assessor shall enter
any land, building or place referred to in clause (a)(ii), or inspect any asset, property,
or investment referred to in clause (a)(iii), except with the consent of the person in
charge of, or in occupation or possession of, such land, building, place, or asset,
property, or investment, without providing such person at least two days' notice in
writing of their intention to do so.
(d) If a person who, under this sub-section, is required to afford any facility to
the Valuation Officer or the engineer, overseer, surveyor, or assessor, either refuses
or evades to afford such facility, the Valuation Officer shall have all the powers as
are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in
respect of the following matters,—

15

20

25

(i) discovery and inspection;
(ii) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer of a
banking company, and examining him on oath;
(iii) compelling the production of books of account and other
documents; and

30

(iv) issuing commissions.
(4) The Valuation Officer shall, estimate the value of the asset, property or
investment after taking into account such evidence as the assessee may produce and
any other evidence in his possession gathered, after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the assessee.

35

(5) The Valuation Officer may estimate the value of the asset, property or
investment to the best of his judgment, if the assessee does not co-operate or comply
with his directions.
(6) The Valuation Officer shall send the report of the estimate made under
sub-section (4) or (5), to the Assessing Officer and the assessee.

40

(7) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, the
Valuation Officer may amend any report made by him, as per section 287.
(8) The Assessing Officer may, on receipt of the report from the Valuation
Officer, and after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard, take into
account such report in making the assessment or reassessment.
(9) The Valuation officer shall send the report referred to in sub-section (6)
within six months from the end of the month in which the reference is made under
sub-section (1).

45

305

(10) For the purposes of this Act,––
(a) the Central Government may appoint as many Valuation Officers, as
necessary; and
5

10

(b) subject to the rules and orders of the Central Government regulating
the conditions of service of persons in public services and posts, a Principal
Chief Commissioner, or a Chief Commissioner, or a Principal Commissioner
or a Commissioner may appoint as many engineers, overseers, surveyors and
assessors as may be necessary to assist the Valuation Officers in the
performance of their functions.
270. (1) Where a return has been made under section 263, or in response to a
notice under section 268(1) such return shall be processed in the following
manner:—
(a) the total income or loss shall be computed after making the
adjustments towards the following:—

15

(i) any arithmetical error in the return;
(ii) an incorrect claim, if such incorrect claim is apparent from any
information in the return;

20

(iii) disallowance of loss claimed, if return of the tax year for which
set off of loss is claimed was furnished beyond the due date specified
under section 263(1);
(iv) disallowance of expenditure or increase in income indicated in
the audit report but not taken into account in computing the total income
in the return; or

25

(v) disallowance of deduction claimed under section 144 or under
any of the provisions of Chapter VIII if the return is furnished beyond
the due date specified under section 263(1);
(b) the tax, interest and fee, if any, shall be computed on the basis of the
total income computed under clause (a);

30

(c) the sum payable by, or the amount of refund due to, the assessee shall
be determined after adjustment of the tax, interest and fee, if any, computed
under clause (b) by—
(i) any tax deducted at source;
(ii) any tax collected at source;
(iii) any advance tax paid;

35

(iv) any rebate or relief allowable under Chapter IX;
(v) any tax paid on self-assessment; and
(vi) any amount paid otherwise by way of tax, interest or fee;

40

(d) an intimation shall be prepared or generated and sent to the assessee
specifying the sum determined to be payable by, or refund due to, the assessee
under clause (c); and
(e) the amount of refund due to the assessee in pursuance of the
determination under clause (c) shall be granted to the assessee.
(2) Before making any adjustment under sub-section (1)(a),—

45

(a) an intimation is to be given to the assessee of such adjustments either
in writing or in electronic mode;
(b) the response received from the assessee in this regard, if any, shall
be considered; and in a case where no response is received within thirty days
of the issue of such intimation, such adjustments shall be made.

Assessment.

306

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), an intimation shall also be sent to the
assessee in a case where the loss declared in the return by the assessee is adjusted
but no tax, interest or fee is payable by, or no refund is due to, him.
(4) No intimation under sub-section (1) shall be sent after the expiry of nine
months from the end of the financial year in which the return is made.

5

(5) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) to (4),—
(a) “an incorrect claim apparent from any information in the return” shall
mean a claim, on the basis of an entry, in the return,—
(i) of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the same
or some other item in such return;

10

(ii) in respect of which the information required to be furnished under
this Act to substantiate such entry has not been so furnished; or
(iii) in respect of a deduction, where such deduction exceeds
specified statutory limit which may have been expressed as monetary
amount or percentage or ratio or fraction;

15

(b) “the acknowledgement of the return” shall be deemed to be the
intimation in a case where no sum is payable by, or refundable to, the
assessee under sub-section(1)(c), and where no adjustment has been made
under sub-section(1)(a).
(6) For the purposes of processing of returns under sub-section (1), the Board
may make a scheme for centralised processing of returns with a view to
expeditiously determining the tax payable by, or the refund due to, the assessee as
required under the said sub-section.
(7) The scheme made under sub-section (6) shall, as soon as may be laid before
each House of Parliament.

20

25

(8) Where a return has been furnished under section 263 or in response to a
notice under section 268(1), the Assessing Officer or the prescribed income-tax
authority, if, considers it necessary or expedient to ensure that the assessee—
(a) has not understated the income;
(b) has not computed excessive loss;

30

(c) has not under-paid the tax in any manner,
shall serve on the assessee a notice requiring him, on a date to be specified therein,—
(i) either to attend the office of the Assessing Officer; or
(ii) to produce, or cause to be produced before the Assessing Officer any
evidence on which the assessee may rely in support of the return.

35

(9) No notice under sub-section (8) shall be served on the assessee after the expiry
of three months from the end of the financial year in which the return is furnished.
(10) On the day specified in the notice issued under sub-section (8), or as soon
afterwards as may be, after hearing such evidence as the assessee may produce and
such other evidence as the Assessing Officer may require on specified points, and
after taking into account all relevant material which he has gathered, the Assessing
Officer, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (11) and (13), shall—

40

(a) by an order in writing, make an assessment of the total income or
loss of the assessee; and
(b) determine the sum payable by him or refund of any amount due to
him on the basis of such assessment.

45

307

5

(11) In the case of entities referred to in sub-section (12), which are required
to furnish the return of income under section 263(1)(a)(iv), no order under
sub-section (10) making an assessment of the total income or loss of any such entity
shall be made by the Assessing Officer, without giving effect to the provisions of
section 11, unless—
(i) the Assessing Officer has intimated the Central Government or the
prescribed authority the contravention of the provisions mentioned in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 23, 24 or 25), by such entity, where in his view such contravention
has taken place; and

10

(ii) the approval granted to such entity has been withdrawn or
notification issued in respect of such entity has been rescinded.
(12) For the purposes of sub-section (11), the entities shall be—
(a) a research association referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 23);
(b) an association or institution referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 24);

15

(c) an institution referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 25).
(13) In the case of a registered non-profit organisation, where the Assessing
Officer is satisfied that any such entity has committed any specified violation as
mentioned in section 351(1), he shall—

20

(a) send a reference to the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner to
withdraw the approval or registration; and
(b) no order making an assessment of the total income or loss of such
registered non-profit organisation shall be made by him without giving effect
to the order passed by the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner under
section 351(2)(ii)(A) or (B).

25

(14) For the purposes of sub-section (10), where the Assessing Officer is
satisfied that the activities of the university, college or other institution referred to
in section 45(3)(a) (hereinafter referred to as “entity”) are not being carried out in
accordance with all or any of the conditions subject to which such entity was
approved, then––

30

(a) he may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against the proposed withdrawal to the concerned entity, recommend to the
Central Government to withdraw the approval; and
(b) that Government may by order, withdraw the approval and forward
a copy of the order to the concerned entity and the Assessing Officer.

35

(15) Where a regular assessment under sub-section (10) or section 271 is
made,—
(a) any tax or interest paid by the assessee under sub-section (1) shall be
considered to have been paid towards such regular assessment;

40

(b) if no refund is due on regular assessment or the amount refunded
under sub-section (1) exceeds the amount refundable on regular
assessment, the whole or the excess amount so refunded shall be
considered to be tax payable by the assessee and the provisions of this Act
shall apply accordingly.
271.(1) If any person—

45

50

(a) fails to make the return required under sub-section 263(1) and has
not made a return or a revised return under section 263(4) or (5) or an updated
return under section 263(6);
(b) fails to comply with all the terms of a notice issued under
section 268(1) or fails to comply with a direction issued under
section 268(5);

Best judgment
assessment.

308

(c) having made a return, fails to comply with all the terms of a notice
issued under sub-section 270(8),
the Assessing Officer, after taking into account all relevant materials which he has
gathered, shall, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard, make the
assessment of the total income or loss to the best of his judgment and determine the
sum payable by the assessee on the basis of such assessment.
(2) The Assessing Officer before making an assessment under sub-section (1)
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), serve a notice on the assessee to
show cause, on a date and time to be specified in the notice, as to why assessment
should not be completed to the best of his judgment.

5

10

(3) It shall not be necessary to give the opportunity referred to in sub-section (2)
in a case where a notice under section 268(1) has been issued prior to the making of
an assessment under this section.
Power of Joint
Commissioner to
issue directions
in certain cases.

272. (1) A Joint Commissioner may, on his own motion or on a reference
being made to him by the Assessing Officer or on the application of an assessee,
call for and examine the record of any proceeding in which an assessment is
pending and, if he considers that, having regard to the nature of the case or the
amount involved or for any other reason, it is necessary or expedient so to do,
he may—
(a) issue such directions as he thinks fit for the guidance of the Assessing
Officer to enable him to complete the assessment; and

15

20

(b) such directions shall be binding on the Assessing Officer.
(2) No directions which are prejudicial to the assessee shall be issued under
sub-section (1) without giving an opportunity of being heard to the assessee.
(3) For the purposes of this section, no direction as to the lines on which an
investigation connected with the assessment should be made, shall be deemed to be
a direction prejudicial to the assessee.
Faceless
Assessment.

273.(1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in any other
provision of this Act, the assessment, reassessment or recomputation under section
270(10) or 271 or 279, as the case may be, with respect to the cases referred to in
sub-section (2), shall be made in a faceless manner as per such procedure, as
prescribed in this behalf.
(2) The faceless assessment under sub-section (1) shall be made in respect of
such territorial area, or persons or class of persons, or incomes or class of incomes,
or cases or class of cases, as specified by the Board.

25

30

35

(3) The Board may, for the purposes of faceless assessment, set up the
following Centre and Units and specify their functions and jurisdiction:—
(a) a National Faceless Assessment Centre to facilitate the conduct of
faceless assessment proceedings in a centralised manner including assigning
the case selected for the purposes of faceless assessment under this section to
a specific assessment unit, intimating the assessee that assessment in his case
shall be completed in faceless manner, serving a notice to the assessee under
section 268(1) or 270(8), and forwarding any response of the assessee to the
assessment unit;
(b) such assessment units, as it may deem necessary to conduct the
faceless assessment, to perform the function of making assessment, which
includes analysis of the material furnished by the assessee or any other person,
identification of points or issues material for the determination of any liability
(including refund) under this Act, seeking information or clarification on
points or issues so identified, determination of any variation prejudicial to the
assessee, and such other functions as may be required for the purposes of
making faceless assessment;

40

45

50

309

5

10

15

20

(c) such verification units, as it may deem necessary to facilitate the
conduct of faceless assessment, to perform the function of verification, which
includes enquiry, cross verification, examination of books of account,
examination of witnesses and recording of statements, and such other
functions as may be required for the purposes of verification;
(d) such technical units, as it may deem necessary to facilitate the
conduct of faceless assessment, to perform the function of providing technical
assistance which includes any assistance or advice on legal, accounting,
forensic, information technology, valuation, transfer pricing, data analytics,
management or any other technical matter under this Act or an agreement
entered into under section 159, which may be required in a particular case or
a class of cases, under this section;
(e) such review units, as it may deem necessary to facilitate the conduct
of faceless assessment, to perform the function of review of any variation
proposed by the assessment unit (wherever it is so considered necessary by
the National Faceless Assessment Centre), which includes checking whether
the relevant and material evidence has been brought on record, relevant points
of fact and law have been duly incorporated, the issues requiring addition or
disallowance have been incorporated and such other functions as may be
required for the purposes of review.
(4) In accordance with the procedure as prescribed under sub-section (1),––
(a) the verification unit, the technical unit and the review unit shall
facilitate the conduct of faceless assessment; and
(b) the assessment unit shall––

25

(i) make the assessment of the total income or loss, by an order in
writing after taking into account all relevant material which it has
gathered and after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard; and
(ii)determine the sum payable by the assessee or refund of any
amount due to him on the basis of such assessment.

30

(5) For the purposes of this section, the terms “assessment unit”,
“verification unit”, “technical unit” and “review unit” shall refer to an
Assessing Officer having powers so assigned by the Board.
(6) The assessment unit, verification unit, technical unit and the review
unit shall have the following authorities:—

35

(a) Additional Commissioner or Additional Director or Joint
Commissioner or Joint Director, as the case may be;
(b) Deputy Commissioner or Deputy Director or Assistant
Commissioner or Assistant Director, or Income-tax Officer, as the case
may be;

40

(c) such other income-tax authority, ministerial staff, executive or
consultant, as may be considered necessary by the Board.
(7) All communications, save as otherwise provided in sub-section (8),—

45

50

(a) among the assessment unit, review unit, verification unit or
technical unit or with the assessee or any other person with respect to the
information or documents or evidence or any other details, as may be
necessary for the purposes of making a faceless assessment shall be
through the National Faceless Assessment Centre;
(b) between the National Faceless Assessment Centre and the
assessee, or his authorised representative, or any other person shall be
exchanged exclusively by electronic mode; and
(c) between the National Faceless Assessment Centre and various
units shall be exchanged exclusively by electronic mode.

310

(8) The provisions of sub-section (7) shall not apply to the enquiry or
verification conducted by the verification unit in the circumstances as specified by
the Board in this behalf.
(9) The Principal Chief Commissioner or the Principal Director General, as the
case may be, in-charge of the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall, as per the
procedure laid down by the Board in this regard, if he considers appropriate that the
provisions of section 268(5) may be invoked in the case,—
(a) forward any reference received from an assessment unit in this regard to
the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner having jurisdiction over such case, and inform
the assessment unit accordingly;

5

10

(b) transfer the case to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such
case as per sub-section (12).
(10) Where a reference has been received by the Principal Chief Commissioner or
Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner under sub-section
(9)(a), he shall direct the Assessing Officer, having jurisdiction over the case, to invoke
the provisions of section 268(5).
(11) Where a reference has not been forwarded as per sub-section (9)(a) to the
Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner, having jurisdiction over the case, the assessment unit shall proceed to
complete the assessment as per the procedure laid down in this section.
(12) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1) or (2), the Principal
Chief Commissioner or the Principal Director General, as the case may be, in-charge of
National Faceless Assessment Centre may, at any stage of the assessment, if considered
necessary, transfer the case to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such case,
with the prior approval of the Board.

15

20

25

(13) In this section,––
(a) “designated portal” means the web portal designated as such by the
Principal Chief Commissioner or the Principal Director General, in charge of the
National Faceless Assessment Centre;

30

(b) “faceless assessment” means the assessment proceedings conducted
electronically in 'e-Proceeding' facility through registered account of the assessee
in designated portal; and.
(c) “registered account” of the assessee means the electronic filing account
registered by the assessee in designated portal.
Reference to
Principal
Commissioner
or
Commissioner in
certain cases.

274. (1) The Assessing Officer may make a reference to the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner at any stage of the assessment or reassessment
proceedings before him, if, having regard to the material and evidence available
with him, he considers that it is necessary to—
(a) declare
arrangement; and

an

arrangement

as

an

impermissible

35

40

avoidance

(b) determine the consequence of such an arrangement within the
meaning of Chapter XI.
(2) The Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall, on receipt of a
reference under sub-section (1), if he is of the opinion that the provisions of
Chapter XI are required to be invoked,––

45

311

(a) issue a notice to the assessee, setting out the reasons and basis of such
opinion, for submitting objections, if any; and
(b) provide an opportunity of being heard to the assessee within such
period, not exceeding sixty days, as specified in the said notice.
5

10

15

(3) If the assessee fails to furnish any objection to the notice within the time
specified in the notice issued under sub-section (2), the Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner shall issue such directions as he deems fit in respect of declaration
of the arrangement to be an impermissible avoidance arrangement.
(4) In case the assessee objects to the proposed action, and the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner, after hearing the assessee in the matter, is not
satisfied by the explanation of the assessee, then, he shall make a reference in the
matter to the Approving Panel for the purpose of declaration of the arrangement as
an impermissible avoidance arrangement.
(5) If the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner is satisfied, after having
heard the assessee that the provisions of Chapter XI are not to be invoked, he shall
by an order in writing, communicate the same to the Assessing Officer with a copy
to the assessee.
(6) The Approving Panel, on receipt of a reference from the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner under sub-section (4), shall––

20

(a) issue such directions, as it deems fit, in respect of the declaration of
the arrangement as an impermissible avoidance arrangement as per the
provisions of Chapter XI; and
(b) specify the tax year or years to which such declaration of an
arrangement as an impermissible avoidance arrangement shall apply.

25

(7) No direction under sub-section (6) shall be issued unless an opportunity of
being heard is given to the assessee and the Assessing Officer on such directions
which are prejudicial to the interest of the assessee or the interests of the revenue,
as the case may be.
(8) The Approving Panel may, before issuing any direction under sub-section (6),—

30

(a) if it is of the opinion that any further inquiry in the matter is
necessary, direct the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner to make such
inquiry or cause the inquiry to be made by any other income-tax authority and
furnish a report containing the result of such inquiry to it; or
(b) call for and examine such records relating to the matter as it deems fit; or

35

(c) require the assessee to furnish such documents and evidence as it
may direct.
(9) If the members of the Approving Panel differ in opinion on any point, such
point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the members.

40

45

(10) The Assessing Officer, on receipt of directions of the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner under sub-section (3) or of the Approving Panel
under sub-section (6), shall proceed to complete the proceedings referred to in
sub-section (1) as per such directions and the provisions of Chapter XI.
(11) If any direction issued under sub-section (6) specifies that declaration of the
arrangement as impermissible avoidance arrangement is applicable for any tax year other
than the tax year to which the proceedings referred to in sub-section (1) pertains, then,––

312

(a) the Assessing Officer while completing any assessment or reassessment
proceedings relevant to such other tax year shall do so as per such directions and
the provisions of Chapter XI; and
(b) it shall not be necessary for him to seek fresh direction on the issue
for the relevant tax year.

5

(12) No order of assessment or reassessment shall be passed by the Assessing
Officer without the prior approval of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner,
if any tax consequences have been determined in the order under the provisions of
Chapter XI.
(13) The Approving Panel shall, subject to sub-sections (14) and (15), issue
directions under sub-section (6) within six months from the end of the month in
which the reference under sub-section (4) was received.

10

(14) In computing the period referred to in sub-section (13), the following
shall be excluded:—
(a) the period commencing from the date on which the first direction is
issued by the Approving Panel to the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner
for getting the inquiries conducted through the authority competent under an
agreement referred to in section 159 and ending with the date on which the
information so requested is last received by the Approving Panel or one year,
whichever is less;

15

20

(b) the period commencing on the date on which the proceeding of the
Approving Panel is stayed by an order or injunction of any court and ending
on the date on which certified copy of the order vacating the stay was received
by the Approving Panel.
(15) If immediately after the exclusion of the period as per sub-section (14),
the remaining period available to the Approving Panel for issue of directions is less
than sixty days, such remaining period shall be extended to sixty days and the period
of six months mentioned in sub-section (13) shall be deemed to have been extended
accordingly.

25

(16) The directions issued by the Approving Panel under sub-section (6) shall
be binding on—

30

(a) the assessee; and
(b) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner and the income-tax
authorities subordinate to him.
(17) No appeal under the Act shall lie against directions issued by the
Approving Panel under sub-section (6), irrespective of anything contained in any
other provision of the Act.
(18) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of this section, constitute
one or more Approving Panels as may be necessary and each panel shall consist of
three members including a Chairperson.

35

40

(19) The Chairperson of the Approving Panel shall be a person who is or has
been a judge of a High Court, and—
(a) one member shall be a member of Indian Revenue Service not below
the rank of Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner of
Income-tax; and

45

313

(b) one member shall be an academic or scholar having special
knowledge of matters, such as direct taxes, business accounts and international
trade practices.
5

(20) The term of the Approving Panel shall ordinarily be for one year and may
be extended from time to time up to three years.
(21) The Chairperson and members of the Approving Panel shall meet, as and
when required, to consider the references made to the panel and shall be paid such
remuneration as prescribed.

10

(22) In addition to the powers conferred on the Approving Panel under this
section, the powers which are vested in the Board for Advance Rulings under
section 387 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Approving Panel.
(23) The Board shall provide to the Approving Panel such officials as may be
necessary for the efficient exercise of powers and discharge of functions of the
Approving Panel under this Act.

15

Reference to
Dispute
Resolution
Panel.

20

(24) The Board may make rules for the purposes of the constitution and
efficient functioning of the Approving Panel and expeditious disposal of the
references received under sub-section (4).
275. (1) The Assessing Officer shall, irrespective of anything to the contrary
contained in this Act, in the first instance, forward a draft of the proposed order of
assessment (hereafter in this section referred to as the draft order) to the eligible
assessee, if he proposes to make any variation which is prejudicial to the interest of
such assessee.
(2) On receipt of the draft order, the eligible assessee shall, within thirty days
of its receipt,—

25

(a) file his acceptance of the variations to the Assessing Officer; or
(b) file his objections, if any, to such variation with,—
(i) the Dispute Resolution Panel; and
(ii) the Assessing Officer.

30

(3) The Assessing Officer shall complete the assessment on the basis of the
draft order, if—
(a) the assessee intimates to the Assessing Officer the acceptance of the
variation; or
(b) no objection is received within the period specified in sub-section (2).

35

(4) The Assessing Officer shall, irrespective of anything contained in
section 286, pass the assessment order under sub-section (3) within one month from
the end of the month in which,—
(a) the acceptance is received; or
(b) the period of filing of objections under sub-section (2) expires.

40

(5) The Dispute Resolution Panel shall, in a case where any objection is
received under sub-section (2), issue such directions, as it thinks fit, for guidance of
the Assessing Officer to enable him to complete the assessment.
(6) The Dispute Resolution Panel shall issue the directions as referred to in
sub-section (5), in writing, stating the points of determination, the decision thereon
and the reason for such decision.

314

(7) The Dispute Resolution Panel may, before issuing any directions referred
to in sub-section (5),—
(a) make such further enquiry, as it thinks fit; or
(b) cause any further enquiry to be made by any income-tax authority,
and report the result of the same to it.

5

(8) The Dispute Resolution Panel may, confirm, reduce or enhance the
variations proposed in the draft order, so however, that it shall not set aside any
proposed variation, or issue any direction under sub-section (5) for further enquiry
and passing of the assessment order.
(9) For the purposes of sub-section (8), the power of the Dispute Resolution
Panel to enhance the variation shall include the power to consider any matter arising
out of the assessment proceedings relating to the draft order, irrespective of the fact
that such matter was not raised by the eligible assessee.
(10) If the members of the Dispute Resolution Panel differ in opinion on any
point, the point shall be decided as per the opinion of the majority of the members.

10

15

(11) Every direction issued by the Dispute Resolution Panel shall be binding
on the Assessing Officer.
(12) No direction under sub-section (5) shall be issued unless an opportunity
of being heard is given to the assessee, and the Assessing Officer, on such directions
which are prejudicial to the interest of the assessee, or the interest of the revenue,
respectively.

20

(13) No direction under sub-section (5) shall be issued after nine months from
the end of the month in which the draft order is forwarded to the eligible assessee.
(14) Upon receipt of the directions issued under sub-section (5), the Assessing
Officer shall, in conformity with the directions, complete, irrespective of anything
to the contrary contained in section 286, the assessment without providing any
further opportunity of being heard to the assessee, within one month from the end
of the month in which such direction is received.
(15) The Board may make rules for the purposes of the efficient functioning
of the Dispute Resolution Panel and expeditious disposal of the objections filed
under sub-section (2) by the eligible assessee.

25

30

(16) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any assessment or
reassessment order passed by the Assessing Officer with the prior approval of the
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner as provided in section 274(12).
(17) In this section, subject to the provisions of sub-section (18),—

35

(a) “Dispute Resolution Panel” means a collegium comprising of three
Principal Commissioners or Commissioners of Income-tax constituted by the
Board for this purpose;
(b) “eligible assessee” means,—
(i) any person in whose case the variation referred to in
sub-section (1) arises as a consequence of the order of the Transfer
Pricing Officer passed under section 166(6);

40

(ii) any non-resident (not being a company), or any foreign
company.
(18) The eligible assessee referred to in sub-section (17) shall not include
person referred to in section 292(1) or other person referred to in section 295.

45

315

(19) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any proceedings under
Chapter XVI-B.

5

276. (1) Income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession” or “Income from other sources” shall, subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2), be computed as per either cash or mercantile system of accounting
regularly employed by the assessee.

Method of
accounting.

(2) The Central Government may notify income computation and disclosure
standards to be followed by any class of assessees or in respect of any class of
income.
10

(3) The Assessing Officer may make an assessment in the manner provided in
section 271, where––
(a) he is not satisfied about the correctness or completeness of the
accounts of the assessee;

15

(b) the method of accounting provided in sub-section (1) has not been
regularly followed by the assessee; or
(c) income has not been computed as per the standards notified under
sub-section (2).
277. (1) For the purposes of determining the income chargeable under the head
“Profits and gains of business or profession”,—

20

25

30

(i) the valuation of inventory shall be made at lower of actual cost or net
realisable value computed as per the income computation and disclosure
standards notified under section 276(2);
(ii) the valuation of purchase and sale of goods or services and valuation
of inventory shall be adjusted to include any tax, duty, cess or fee (by whatever
name called) actually paid or incurred by the assessee to bring the goods or
services to the place of its location and condition as on the date of valuation;
(iii) the inventory being securities not listed on a recognised stock
exchange, or listed but not quoted on a recognised stock exchange with
regularity from time to time, shall be valued at actual cost initially recognised
as per the income computation and disclosure standards notified under
section 276(2);
(iv) the inventory being securities other than those referred to in clause (iii),
shall be valued at lower of actual cost or net realisable value as per the income
computation and disclosure standards notified under section 276(2).

35

40

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the inventory being securities held by
a scheduled bank or public financial institution shall be valued as per the income
computation and disclosure standards notified under section 276(2) after taking into
account the extant guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India in this regard.
(3) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2), the comparison of actual cost
and net realisable value of securities shall be made category-wise.
(4) For the purposes of this section, any tax, duty, cess or fee (by whatever
name called) under any law in force, shall include all such payment irrespective of
any right arising as a consequence to such payment.

18 of 2013.

45

(5) In this section, “public financial institution” shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in section 2(72) of the Companies Act, 2013.

Method of
accounting in
certain cases.

316

Taxability of
certain income.

278. (1) The interest received by an assessee on any compensation or on
enhanced compensation, shall be deemed to be the income of the tax year in which
it is received, irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in section 276.
(2) Any claim for escalation of price in a contract or export incentives shall be
deemed to be the income of the tax year in which reasonable certainty of its
realisation is achieved.

5

(3) The income referred to in section 2(49)(w) shall be treated as the income
of the tax year in which it is received, if not charged to income-tax in any earlier tax
year.
Income escaping
assessment.

279. (1) If, in the case of an assessee, any income chargeable to tax has escaped
assessment for any tax year (hereinafter referred to as “the relevant tax year” in this
section and sections 280 to 286, the Assessing Officer may, subject to the provisions
of sections 280 to 286, for the relevant tax year,––

10

(a) assess or reassess income;
(b) recompute the loss or the depreciation allowance or any other
allowance or deduction.

15

(2) For the purposes of the assessment or reassessment or recomputation under
this section, Assessing Officer may assess or reassess––
(a) the income which has escaped assessment;
(b) income in respect of other issues which come to his notice
subsequently in the course of the proceedings under this section, irrespective
of the fact that the provisions of sections 280, 281 and 284 were not
complied with.
Issue of notice.

280. (1)(a) Before making the assessment, reassessment or recomputation
under section 279, the Assessing Officer shall, subject to the provisions of
section 281, issue a notice to the assessee, along with a copy of the order passed
under section 281(3).
(b) the notice referred to in clause (a) shall require the assessee to furnish,
within such period as may be specified therein, a return of his income or income of
any other person in respect of whom he is assessable under this Act during the
relevant tax year; and.

20

25

30

(c) the period specified in the notice referred to in clause (a) shall not exceed
three months from the end of the month in which such notice is issued.
(2) The return of income required under sub-section (1) shall be furnished in
such form, verified in such manner and setting forth such other particulars, as
prescribed, and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly, as if such return
were a return required to be furnished under section 263.
(3) Any return of income required under sub-section (1), furnished after the
expiry of the period specified in the notice under the said sub-section, shall not be
deemed to be a return under section 263.

35

40

(4) No notice under this section shall be issued unless there is information with
the Assessing Officer which suggests that the income chargeable to tax has escaped
assessment in the case of the assessee for the relevant tax year.
(5) No notice under this section shall be issued without prior approval of the
specified authority, where the Assessing Officer has received––
(a) information under the scheme notified under section 260; or

45

317

(b) directions from the Approving Panel under section 274(6); or
(c) any finding or direction contained in an order passed by any
authority, Tribunal or court in any proceeding under this Act by way of appeal,
reference or revision or by a Court in any proceeding under any other law.
5

10

(6) For the purposes of this section and section 281, the information with the
Assessing Officer which suggests that the income chargeable to tax has escaped
assessment means—
(a) any information in the case of the assessee for the relevant tax year
as per the risk management strategy formulated by the Board from time to
time;
(b) any audit objection to the effect that the assessment in the case of the
assessee for the relevant tax year has not been made as per this Act;
(c) any information received under an agreement referred to in section 159
of this Act;

15

(d) any information made available to the Assessing Officer under the
scheme notified under section 260;
(e) any information which requires action in consequence of the order of
a Tribunal or a Court;

20

(f) any information in the case of the assessee emanating from the survey
conducted under section 253, other than under sub-section (4) of the said
section;
(g) any directions in the case of the assessee given by the Approving
Panel under section 274(6);

25

30

(h) any finding or direction contained in an order passed by any
authority, Tribunal or court in any proceeding under this Act by way of appeal,
reference or revision, or by a Court in any proceeding under any other law.
281. (1) Where the Assessing Officer has information which suggests that
income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment in the case of an assessee for the
relevant tax year, he shall, before issuing any notice under section 280 provide an
opportunity of being heard to such assessee by serving upon him a show cause notice.

Procedure before
issuance of
notice under
section 280.

(2) The notice to show cause referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
accompanied by the information which suggests that income chargeable to tax has
escaped assessment in his case for the relevant tax year, and on receipt of such
notice, the assessee may furnish his reply within such period, as specified in therein.
35

40

(3) The Assessing Officer shall, on the basis of material available on record
and taking into account the reply of the assessee furnished under sub-section (2), if
any, pass an order with the prior approval of the specified authority determining
whether or not it is a fit case to issue notice under section 280.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to income chargeable to tax
escaping assessment for any tax year in the case of an assessee, where the Assessing
Officer has received—
(a) information under the scheme notified under section 260;
(b) directions issued by the Approving Panel under section 274(6);

45

(c) any finding or direction contained in an order passed by any
authority, Tribunal or court in any proceeding under this Act by way of appeal,
reference or revision, or by a Court in any proceeding under any other law.
282. (1) No notice under section 280 shall be issued for the relevant tax year,—
(a) if four years and three months have elapsed from the end of the
relevant tax year, unless the case falls under clause (b);

Time limit for
notices under
sections 280 and
281.

318

(b) if four years and three months, but not more than six years and three
months, have elapsed from the end of the relevant tax year, unless the
Assessing Officer has books of account or other documents or evidence related
to any asset or expenditure or transaction or entry which shows that the income
chargeable to tax, which has escaped assessment, amounts to or is likely to
amount to fifty lakh rupees or more.

5

(2) No notice to show cause under section 281 shall be issued for the relevant
tax year,—
(a) if four years have elapsed from the end of the relevant tax year, unless
the case falls under clause (b);

10

(b) if four years, but not more than six years, have elapsed from the end
of the relevant tax year, unless the income chargeable to tax which has escaped
assessment, as per the information with the Assessing Officer, amounts to or
is likely to amount to fifty lakh rupees or more.
(3) No notice under section 280 or 281 shall be issued within one year from
the end of any tax year.
Provision for
cases where
assessment is in
pursuance of an
order on appeal,
etc.

15

283. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in sections 280 and 282, the notice
under section 280 may be issued at any time for the purpose of making an assessment
or reassessment or recomputation in consequence of or to give effect to—
(a) any finding or direction contained in an order passed by any
authority, Tribunal or court in any proceeding under this Act by way of appeal,
reference or revision or by a Court in any proceeding under any other law; or

20

(b) the directions issued by the Approving Panel under section 274(6).
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply in any case where any
such assessment, reassessment or recomputation as is referred to in that sub-section
relates to a tax year in respect of which an assessment, reassessment or
recomputation could not have been made, by reason of any other provisions limiting
the time within which any action for assessment, reassessment or recomputation
may be taken, at the time when,—
(a) the order which was the subject-matter of the appeal, reference or
revision, as the case may be, was made; or

25

30

(b) the reference from the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner is made to the Approving Panel under section 274(4).
Sanction for
issue of notice.

284. The specified authority for the purposes of sections 280 and 281 shall be
the Additional Commissioner or the Additional Director or the Joint Commissioner
or the Joint Director.

Other
provisions.

285. (1) In an assessment, reassessment or recomputation made under
section 279, the tax shall be chargeable at the rate or rates at which it would have
been charged had the income not escaped assessment.
(2) The Assessing Officer may drop the proceedings initiated under
section 279 on a claim made by the assessee to the effect that—

35

40

(a) he had been assessed on an amount not lower than what he would be
rightly liable for, even if the income alleged to have escaped assessment had been
taken into account, or the assessment or computation had been properly made; and
(b) he has not impugned any part of the original assessment order for the
relevant year under section 356 or 357 or 378.
(3) Where a claim has been made by an assessee under sub-section (2), he
shall not be entitled to reopen matters concluded by an order under section 287 or
288 or 365(10) or 368 or 377.

45

319

286. (1) No order in respect of proceedings mentioned in column B of the
Table below shall be made after expiry of the period specified in column D of the
said Table and calculated from the date as mentioned in column C thereof.
Table
5

Sl. No.

Nature of
Proceedings or
orders

Date from which time limit
for completion is to be
calculated

Time limit
for
completion

A

B

C

D

1.

Assessment order
under section 270(10)
or section 271.

End of the financial year
succeeding the relevant tax
year.

One year.

2.

Assessment order
under section 270(10)
or 271, where an
updated return of
income is furnished
under section 263(6).

End of the financial year in
which such updated return
was furnished.

One year.

3.

Assessment order
under section 270(10)
or 271, where return
is
furnished
in
consequence of order
under
section
239(3)(b).

End of the financial year in
which such return was
furnished.

One year.

4.

Assessment,
reassessment
or
recomputation order
under section 279.

End of the financial year in
which notice under section
280 was served.

One year.

5.

Fresh assessment
order or fresh order
under section 166 in
pursuance to an order
under section 359, or
363, or 377, or 378
setting
aside
or
canceling
an
assessment order or
an
order
under
section 166.

End of the financial year in
which order under section 359
or 363 is received, or order
under section 377 or 378 is
passed, by the jurisdictional
Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner.

One year.

6.

Assessment
or
reassessment which
stands revived, as per
section 153A(2) of
Income-tax Act, 1961
(43 of 1961), or
section 292.

End of the month in which
such
assessment
or
reassessment stands revived.

One year.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Time limit for
completion of
assessment,
reassessment
and
recomputation.

320

A

B

C

D

7.

Assessment
required to be made
in the hands of
partner,
in
consequence of an
assessment made on
the
firm
under
section 279.

End of the month in which
assessment order in the case
of firm is passed.

One year.

Assessment,
reassessment
or
recomputation
required to be made
on the assessee or
any
person
in
consequence of or to
give effect to any
finding or direction
contained in an
order––

End of the month in which
such order is received, or
passed, by the jurisdictional
Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner.

8.

5

One year.

15

20

(i)
under
section 359 or 363
or 365(10), or
368, or 377 or
378; or

25

(ii) of any Court
in a proceeding
otherwise than by
way of appeal or
reference under
this Act.
9.

Order
giving
effect to an order
under section 359 or
363 or 365(10) or
368 or 377 or 378,
otherwise than by
making
a
fresh
assessment
or
reassessment or fresh
order under section
166, where––
(i) verification of
any issue by way of
submission of any
document by the
assessee or any other
person is to be
carried out; or
(ii) an opportunity
of being heard is to
be given to the
assessee.

10

30

End of the month in which
order under section 359 or
363 or 365(10) or 368 is
received, or order under
section 377 or 378 is passed,
by the jurisdictional Principal
Commissioner
or
Commissioner.

One year.

35

40

45

50

321

A

B

C

D

10.

Order giving effect to
an order under section
359 or 363 or 365(10) or
368 or 377 or 378
otherwise than by making
a fresh assessment or
reassessment or fresh
order under section 166.

End of the month in
which order under
section 359 or 363 or
365(10) or 368 is
received, or order under
section 377 or 378 is
passed
by
the
jurisdictional Principal
Commissioner
or
Commissioner.

Six months,
extendable to
nine months
with
the
approval of
authorities as
per
section
2(62) and (64)

11.

Modification
of
assessment, reassessment
or recomputation to give
effect to the order passed
under section 166 read
with section 377

End of the month in
which such order under
section 166 is received
by
the
Assessing
Officer.

Two
months.

5

10

15

20

(2) Time limit for completion of any assessment or reassessment as provided
in sub-section (1), in a case where reference is made to the Transfer Pricing
Officer for determining the arm’s length price under section 166(1), shall be
extended by an additional period of twelve months.
(3) For the purposes of this section, in computing the time limit for
completion, the following period shall be excluded,––

25

30

35

(a) the time taken in reopening the whole or any part of the proceeding
on request of the assessee or in giving an opportunity to the assessee to be
re-heard under section 244;
(b) the period commencing on the date on which stay on assessment
proceeding was granted by an order or injunction of any court and ending
on the date on which certified copy of the order vacating the stay was
received by jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner;
(c) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing
Officer intimates the Central Government or the prescribed authority, the
contravention of the provisions of Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 23, 24, 25)
or section 270(11)(i), and ending with the date on which the copy of the
order withdrawing the approval or rescinding the notification, as the case
may be, under those provisions is received by the Assessing Officer;
(d) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing
Officer directs the assessee to get his accounts audited or inventory valued
under section 268(5) and––

40

45

(i) ending with the last date on which the assessee is required
to furnish a report of such audit or inventory valuation under that
section; or
(ii) where such direction is challenged before a court, ending
with the date on which the order setting aside such direction is
received by the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner;
(e) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing
Officer makes a reference to the Valuation Officer under section 269(1) and
ending with the date on which the report of the Valuation Officer is received
by him;

322

(f) the period (not exceeding sixty days) commencing from the date on
which the Assessing Officer received the declaration under section 375(1)
and ending with the date on which the order under section 375(3) is made
by him;
(g) the period commencing from the date on which an application is
made before the Board for Advance Rulings under section 383(1) and
ending with the date on which the order either rejecting the application or
the advance ruling pronounced by it, is received by the jurisdictional
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner under section 384(5) or (8), as
the case may be;
(h) the period commencing from the date on which a reference or first
of the references for exchange of information is made by an authority
competent under an agreement referred to in section 159 and ending with
the date on which the information requested is last received by the
jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, or one year,
whichever is less;
(i) the period commencing from the date on which a reference for
declaration of an arrangement to be an impermissible avoidance
arrangement is received by the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner under section 274(1) and ending on the date on which a
direction under sub-section (3) or (6) or an order under sub-section (5) of
the said section is received by the Assessing Officer;
(j) the period (not exceeding one hundred eighty days) commencing
from the date on which a search is initiated under section 247 or a requisition
is made under section 248 and ending on the date on which the seized items
or the requisitioned items, are handed over to the Assessing Officer having
jurisdiction over the assessee,—

5

10

15

20

25

(i) in whose case such search is initiated under section 247 or
such requisition is made under section 248; or
(ii) to whom any money, bullion, jewellery, virtual digital asset
or other valuable article or thing seized or requisitioned belongs to; or

30

(iii) to whom any books of account or documents seized or
requisitioned pertains or pertain to, or any information contained
therein, relates to;
(k) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing
Officer makes a reference to the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner under the section 270(13) and ending with the date on which
copy of the order under of section 351(2)(ii)(A) or (B), is received by the
Assessing Officer.

35

(4) Where immediately after exclusion of the period as mentioned in
sub-section (3), the remaining period for completion available to the Assessing
Officer, as specified in sub-section (1), for making an order of assessment,
reassessment or recomputation, is less than sixty days, such remaining period shall
be extended to sixty days and the aforesaid time limits for completion shall be
deemed to have been extended accordingly.

40

(5) Where the period available to the Transfer Pricing Officer is extended to
sixty days as per section 166(8) and the remaining period for completion available
to the Assessing Officer under this section, for making an order of assessment,
reassessment or re-computation, is less than sixty days, such remaining period
shall be extended to sixty days and the aforesaid time limit for completion shall
be deemed to have been extended accordingly.

45

50

323

43 of 1961.

5

(6) Where a proceeding before the Interim Board for Settlement abates
under section 245HA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the remaining period of
limitation available to the Assessing Officer under this section for making an
order of assessment, reassessment or re-computation, after the exclusion of the
period under section 245HA(4) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, is less than one year,
such remaining period shall be deemed to have been extended to one year; and for
the purposes of determining the period of limitation under sections 282, 287, 288
and 296 and for the purposes of payment of interest under section 437, this
sub-section shall also apply accordingly.

10

(7) In a case where the remaining time period for making an order of regular
or reassessment, after excluding the time period specified in sub-section (3)(k),
ends before the end of the month, the remaining period shall be extended to the
end of such month, and the specified time limit for completion shall be deemed to
have been extended accordingly.

15

(8) For the purposes of this section and section 283, where by an order
referred to in entry in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 8.A)––

20

25

(i) any income is excluded from the total income of the assessee for a
tax year, then, an assessment of such income for another tax year shall be
deemed as one made in consequence of or to give effect to any finding or
direction contained in the said order; or
(ii) any income is excluded from the total income of one person and
held to be the income of another person, then, an assessment of such income
on such other person shall be deemed as one made in consequence of or to
give effect to any finding or direction contained in the said order, if such
other person was given an opportunity of being heard before the said order
was passed.
287. (1) An income-tax authority referred to in section 236, for rectifying
any mistake apparent from the record, may amend any—
(a) order passed by it under the provisions of this Act;

30

(b) intimation or deemed intimation under section 271(1);
(c) intimation under section 399.

35

(2) Irrespective of anything contained in any law in force, the authority
concerned may, amend any order under sub-section (1) in relation to any matter,
other than the matter considered and decided in any proceeding by way of appeal
or revision, relating to such order.
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the authority concerned,––
(a) may make an amendment under sub-section (1) of its own
motion; and

40

(b) shall make such amendment for rectifying any such mistake which
has been brought to its notice by—
(i) the assessee or the deductor or the collector; or
(ii) the Assessing Officer, if the authority concerned is the Joint
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals).

45

(4) No amendment that enhances an assessment, reduces a refund or
otherwise increases the liability of the assessee or the deductor or the collector,
shall be made under this section by the authority concerned without giving––
(a) a notice of its intention of making such amendment; and

Rectification of
mistake.

324

(b) a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(5) The income-tax authority concerned shall pass an order in writing, if an
amendment is made under this section.
(6) The Assessing Officer shall make refund which may be due to the assessee
or the deductor or the collector, where an amendment reduces the assessment or
otherwise reduces the liability of such assessee or the deductor or the collector.

5

(7) The Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee or the deductor or the
collector, a notice of demand in such form as prescribed specifying the sum
payable,—
(a) where an amendment enhances the assessment or reduces a refund
already made or otherwise increases the liability of such assessee or the
deductor or the collector; and

10

(b) such notice shall be deemed to be issued under section 289 and the
provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(8) No amendment under this section, except as provided in section 288,
shall be made after four years from the end of the financial year in which the order
sought to be amended was passed.
(9) Subject to sub-section (8), an income-tax authority referred to in
sub-section (1), shall pass an order for making the amendment or refusing to allow
the claim within six months from the end of the month in which the application
for amendment under this section is received by it from the assessee or the
deductor or the collector.
Other
amendments.

288. The Assessing Officer, may carry out such actions as are specified in
column B of the Table below for reasons mentioned therein, subject to the
conditions as specified in column C, within four years (except serial number 12)
referred to in section 287(8) which shall be reckoned from the time as specified
in column D, and the provisions of section 287 shall, so far as may be, apply to
such amendment:—

15

20

25

Table
Sl.No.
A
1.

Actions
B
Amendment
of
order
of
assessment of the
partner of a firm
so as to adjust the
income of the
partner
corresponding to
the amount not
deductible under
section 35(f)

Conditions
C
Where any remuneration
to any partner determined
in completed assessment of
the firm is subsequently
found not deductible under
section 35(f) in terms of—
(a) assessment or
reassessment of the firm; or
(b) any reduction or
enhancement made in the
income of the firm under
this section or section 287
or 356 or 363 or 365or
368 or 377 or 378; or
(c) any order passed
under section 245D (4) of
the Income-tax Act, 1961
on the application made
by the firm,

Time
D
From the end
of the financial
year in which the
subsequent order
was passed in the
case of the firm.

30

35

40

45

50

325

A

B

C

D

2.

Amendment
of
order
of
assessment of the
member of an
association
of
persons or of a
body
of
individuals; so as
to include the
share of the
member in the
assessment or the
corrections
thereof

Where the share of the
member in the income of the
association of persons or
body
of
individuals
determined in completed
assessment is subsequently
found not included in the
assessment of the member
or, if included, is not correct
in terms of —

From the end
of the financial
year in which the
subsequent order
was passed in the
case
of
the
association
or
body.

5

10

15

(b) any reduction or
enhancement made in the
income of the association
or body under this
section or section 287 or
359 or 363 or 365 or 368
or 377 or 378; or

20

(c) any order passed
under section 245D (4) of
the Income-tax Act, 1961
(43 of 1961) on the
application made by the
association or body.

25

30

3.

35

40

45

50

(a) assessment or
reassessment of the
association or body;

4.

Total income
of the assessee in
respect
of
succeeding year
or years referred
to in column C,
to be recomputed
and
necessary
amendment
made consequent
to proceedings
initiated under
section 279 for
any tax year.

(a) Recomputation of
loss or depreciation; and

The
total
income of the
transferor
company for the
tax year referred
to in column C, to
be recomputed
and
necessary
amendment
made.

Where in the assessment
From the end
for any tax year,—
of the year—

(b) in consequence to
such
recomputation,
recompute the total income
of the assessee for the
succeeding year or years to
which
the
loss
or
depreciation allowance has
been carried forward and
set off under the provisions
of section 112(1) or 113(2)
or 111(1) and (2) or 115(1)

(a) the capital gain
arising from the transfer
of a capital asset is not
charged under section 67
in terms of section
70(1)(c) or (d);

From the end
of the financial
year in which the
order
under
section 279 was
passed.

(i) in which
the capital asset
was converted
or treated as
stock-in trade;
or

326

A

B

C
(b) such gains
are deemed under
section 71(1) as
“Capital gains” of the
tax year in which the
transfer took place at
any time before the
expiry of the period
of eight years from
the
date
of
such transfer by
reason of––

D
(ii)
in
which the parent
company or its
nominees or, the
holding company
ceased to hold the
whole of the
share capital of
the
subsidiary
company.

(i) such capital
asset being converted
by the transferee
company into, or
being treated by it, as
stock-in trade of its
business; or

The order of
assessment to be
amended; so as
to exclude the
capital gain not
chargeable to tax
under any of the
sections referred
to in section 89.

Where in the assessment
for any tax year, a capital
gain on transfer of original
asset, referred to in section
89 is charged to tax and
within the period extended
under that section––

20

25

From the end
of the financial
year in which the
compensation
was received by
the assessee.

The order of
assessment to be
amended - to
allow deduction in respect of such
income or part
thereof as is so
received in, or
brought
into,
India.

30

35

(a)
the
assessee
acquires the new asset
referred to in that
section; or
(b) deposits or invests
such capital gain.

6.

10

15

(ii) the parent
company
or
its
nominees or, the
holding
company
ceasing to hold the
whole of the share
capital
of
the
subsidiary company.
5.

5

Where in the assessment
for any year, any deduction
under section 144 has not
been allowed on the ground
that––
(a) such income has
not been received in
convertible
foreign
exchange in India; or

40

From the end
of the financial
year in which
such income is so
received in, or
brought
into,
India.

45

50

327

A

B

10

15

and subsequently such
income or part thereof has
been or is received in, or
brought into, India in the
manner specified in (b)
above.

20

25

7.

35

40

45

50

D

(b) having been
received in convertible
foreign
exchange
outside India, or having
been converted into
convertible
foreign
exchange outside India,
has not been brought
into India, by or on
behalf of the assessee
with the approval of the
Reserve Bank of India or
such other authority as is
authorised under any
law for the time being in
force for regulating
payments and dealings
in foreign exchange,

5

30

C

The order of
assessment or any
intimation
or
deemed
intimation under
section 270(1), -to
be amended, - to
give credit for
income-tax - for
the year in which
such income is
offered to tax or
assessed to tax in
India.

Where in the assessment
for any tax year or in any
intimation or deemed
intimation under section
270(1) for any tax year,––
(a) credit for incometax paid in any country
outside India or a
specified
territory
outside India referred to
in Chapter IX-B has not
been given on the
ground that the payment
of such tax was under
dispute; and
(b) subsequently such
dispute is settled; and the
assessee, within six
months from the end of
the month in which the
dispute
is
settled,
furnishes
to
the
Assessing Officer—
(i)
evidence
of
settlement of dispute and
evidence of payment of
such tax; and

From the end
of the financial
year in which
such dispute is
settled.

328

A

B

C

D

(ii) an undertaking that
no credit in respect of such
amount has directly or
indirectly been claimed or
shall be claimed for any
other tax year.
8.

The order of
assessment -to be
amended
-to
compute
the
capital gain by
taking the full
value of the
consideration to
be the value as so
revised in appeal
or revision or
reference.

Where, in the assessment
for any year, a capital gain
arising from the transfer of a
capital asset, being land or
building or both, is
computed—
(a) by taking the full
value
of
the
consideration received or
accruing as a result of the
transfer to be the value
adopted or assessed by
any authority of a State
Government for the
purpose of payment of
stamp duty as per
section 78(1); and

5

From the end
of the financial
year in which the
order revising the
value was passed
in appeal or
revision
or
reference.

The order of
assessment -to
be amended - to
compute
the
capital gain by
taking
the
compensation or
consideration as
so reduced by the
court, Tribunal
or any other
authority to be
the full value of
consideration.

(a) Where in the
assessment for any year, a
capital gain arising from the
transfer of a capital asset
being a transfer referred to
in clause (b) is computed––
(i) by taking the
compensation
or
consideration as referred
to in section 67(12)(a) or,
as the case may be, the
compensation
or
consideration enhanced
or further enhanced as
referred to in section
67(12)(b), to be the full
value of consideration
deemed to be received or
accruing as a result of the
transfer of the asset; and
(ii) subsequently such
compensation
or
consideration is reduced
by any court, Tribunal or
other authority.

15

20

(b) subsequently such
value is revised in any
appeal or revision or
reference referred to in
section 78(2)(b).
9.

10

25

From the end
of the financial
year in which the
order reducing
the compensation
was passed by the
court, Tribunal or
other authority.

30

35

40

45

50

329

A

B

C

D

(b) The transfer and
consideration referred to in
clause (a) shall be
(i) Transfer by way of
compulsory acquisition
under any law;

5

10

10.

Amendment
to total income to
disallow
the
deduction
allowed under
section 152.

11.

Amendment
of the order of
assessment
or
any intimation to allow credit of
such
tax
deducted
at
source in the tax
year referred to
in column C, and
the credit of such
tax deducted at
source not to be
allowed in any
other tax year.

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

(ii) consideration that
was determined or
approved by the Central
Government or the
Reserve Bank of India.
Where a deduction has
been allowed to an assessee
in any tax year undersection
152 in respect of any patent,
and subsequently by an order
of the Controller or the High
Court under the Patents Act,
1970 (39 of 1970),—
(a) the patent was
revoked, or
(b) the name of the
assessee was excluded
from the patents register
as patentee in respect of
that patent,
the deduction from the
income by way of royalty
attributable to the period
during which the patent had
been revoked or the period
for which name of the
assessee was excluded as
patentee in respect of that
patent, shall be deemed to
have been wrongly allowed.
(a) Where any income
has been included in the
return of income furnished
by an assessee under
section 263 for any tax
year, and tax on such
income has been deducted
at source and paid to the
credit of the Central
Government as per the
provisions of Chapter XIXB in a subsequent tax year;
and
(b) an application is
made by an assessee in such
form, as prescribed, within
two years from the end of
the tax year in which such
tax was deducted at source.

From the end
of the financial
year in which the
order of the
Controller under
section 2(1)(b), or
the High Court
under
section
2(1)(i), of the
Patents Act, 1970
(39 of 1970), was
passed.

From the end
of the financial
year in which
such tax has been
deducted.

330

Notice of
demand.

A

B

C

D

12.

The order of
assessment
or
any intimation or
deemed
intimation under
section 271 to be
amended for two
consecutive tax
years to give
effect to the
order
passed
under
section
166(6)
or
directions issued
under
section
275(5)

Where the Transfer
Pricing Officer under
section 166(9) declares the
option of the assessee, for
determining the arm’s
length price of similar
international or specified
domestic transaction for the
two consecutive tax years
immediately following the
relevant tax year, as valid.

(i) Within three
months from the
end of the month
in which the
assessment
is
completed in the
case
of
the
assessee for the
relevant tax year,
and section 165(7)
and
(8)
is
applicable.
(ii) If the order
of assessment or
any intimation or
deemed
intimation under
section 270(1), for
the
two
consecutive tax
years is not made
within the said
three
months,
such
recomputation
shall be made
within
three
months from the
end of the month
in which such
order
of
assessment
or
intimation
or
deemed
intimation,
is
made.

289. (1) When any tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum is payable in
consequence of any order passed under this Act, the Assessing Officer shall serve
upon the assessee a notice of demand in such form, as prescribed, specifying the
sum so payable.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

(2) Where any sum is determined to be payable by the assessee or the
deductor or the collector under section 270 or 399, the intimation under the said
sections shall be deemed to be a notice of demand for the purposes of this section.
(3) Where the income of the assessee of any tax year includes income of the
nature specified in section 17(1)(d) and such specified security or sweat equity
shares referred to in the said section are allotted or transferred directly or indirectly
by the current employer, being an eligible start-up referred to in section 140, the tax
or interest on such income included in the notice of demand referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be payable by the assessee within fourteen days—
(a) after the expiry of sixty months from the end of the relevant tax
year; or
(b) from the date of the sale of such specified security or sweat equity
share by the assessee; or

45

50

331

(c) from the date of the assessee ceasing to be the employee of the
employer who allotted or transferred him such specified security or sweat
equity share,
whichever is the earliest.
5

10

290. (1) The Assesssing Officer shall serve on the assessee a modified notice
of demand specifying the sum payable, if any, and such notice shall be treated as
a notice under section 289 and the provisions of this Act shall accordingly, apply
in relation to such notice, where—

Modification
and revision of
notice in certain
cases.

(a) any tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum in respect of which
a notice of demand has been issued earlier under section 289; and
(b) such tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum is reduced as a
result of an order of the Adjudicating Authority as defined in section 5(1) of
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.

31 of 2016.

15

(2) The modified notice of demand as referred to in sub- section (1) shall be
revised where the order referred to in sub-section (1)(b) is modified by the
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal or the Supreme Court.
291. The Assessing Officer shall notify to the assessee by an order in writing
the amount of the loss as computed by him for the purposes of section 111(1) or
(2) or 112 or 113(2) or 115(1), where––

20

Intimation of
loss.

(a) in the course of the assessment of the total income of any assessee,
it is established that a loss has taken place; and
(b) the assessee is entitled to have carried forward and set off such loss
under the provisions of the said sections.
B.—Special procedure for assessment of search cases

25

30

35

40

292. (1) Irrespective of any other provision of this Act, where on or after the
commencement of this Act, in the case of any person, search is initiated or
requisition is made, then, the Assessing Officer shall proceed to assess or reassess
the total income of the block period as per this Chapter.
(2) The assessment or reassessment or recomputation proceedings under the
provisions of this Act (other than this Chapter), if any, pertaining to any tax year
falling in the block period, pending on the date of initiation of search, or the date
of making of requisition, shall abate and shall be deemed to have been abated on
such date.
(3) If any reference has been made under section 166(1) or order has been
passed under section 166(6), the assessment or reassessment or recomputation
proceedings, referred to in sub-section (2) together with such reference or order
shall abate on the date referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) If any assessment under the provisions of this Chapter is required to be
made in the case of an assessee, in whose case a search is initiated or a requisition
is made subsequently––
(a) such pending assessment shall be duly completed;
(b) assessment in respect of such subsequent search or requisition shall
be made thereafter under the provisions of this Chapter; and

45

(c) if the period available for assessment in clause (b) is less than three
months, such period shall be extended to three months from the end of the
month in which the assessment, as referred to in clause (a) was completed.

Assessment of
income
pertaining to the
block period.

332

(5) Irrespective of anything contained in any other provision of this Act, if
any proceeding initiated or completed under this Chapter has been annulled in an
appeal or any other legal proceeding, then––
(a) the assessment or reassessment or recomputation or reference or
order which has abated under sub-section (2) or (3), shall revive with effect
from the date of receipt of the order of such annulment by the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner;

5

(b) the revival, as referred to in clause (a) shall cease to have effect, if
such order of annulment is set aside.
(6) The income (other than undisclosed income) of the tax year in which the
last of the authorisations for a search is executed or a requisition is made, shall be
assessed separately as per other provisions of this Act.
(7) The total income pertaining to the block period, as referred to in
section 293(5) shall be charged to tax at the rate specified in section 192,
irrespective of the tax year or years to which such income pertains.
Computation of
total income of
block period.

10

15

293. (1) The total income of the block period referred to in section 292(1)
shall be the aggregate of the following:—
(a) undisclosed income declared in the return furnished under section 294;
(b) income assessed under section 270(10) or section 271 or 279 of
this Act, or section 153A or 153C of the Income-tax Act, 1961, prior to the
date of initiation of search or the date of making of requisition in respect of
tax years comprising the block period;
(c) income declared in the return of income furnished under
section 263 or in response to a notice under section 268(1) or 280 in respect
of tax years comprising the block period, which is not covered under
clause (a) or (b);

20

25

(d) income determined––
(i) in respect of a tax year, where such tax year has ended and the
due date for furnishing the return for such year has not expired prior to
the date of initiation of the search or the date of requisition, on the basis
of entries relating to such income or transactions as recorded in the books
of account and other documents maintained in the normal course before
the date of initiation of search or the date of requisition;
(ii) in respect of period commencing from 1st April of the tax year
in which the search is initiated or requisition is made and ending on the
day immediately preceding the date of initiation of search or requisition,
on the basis of entries relating to such income or transactions as recorded
in the books of account and other documents maintained in the normal
course for such period on or before the day immediately preceding the
date of initiation of search or the date of requisition;
(iii) in respect of period commencing from the date of initiation of the
search or the date of requisition and ending on the date of the execution of
the last of the authorisations for search or requisition, on the basis of entries
relating to such income or transactions as recorded in the books of account
and other documents maintained in the normal course for such period on or
before the date of the execution of the last of the authorisations;

30

35

40

45

(e) undisclosed income determined by the Assessing Officer under
sub-section (2).
(2) The undisclosed income forming part of the total income referred to in
section 292(1) shall be computed on the basis of following:––
(a) evidence found as a result of search or survey or requisition; and

50

43 of 1961.

333

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

(b) any other material or information as are either available with the
Assessing Officer or comes to his notice during the course of proceedings
under this Chapter.
(3) The relating to any international transaction or specified domestic
transaction referred to in section 166, shall not be considered for the purposes of
determining the total income of the block period, and shall be considered in the
assessment made under other provisions of this Act, if––
(a) such income pertains to the period beginning from the 1st April of
the tax year in which last of the authorisations was executed and ending with
the date of execution of the last of the authorisations; and
(b) such income is required to be determined––
(i) as a result of search or requisition of books of account or other
documents; or
(ii) based on any other material or information as are either
available with the Assessing Officer or comes to his notice during the
course of proceedings under this Chapter; or
(iii) based on entries relating to income or transactions as recorded
in books of account and other documents maintained in the normal course
on or before the date of the execution of the last of the authorisations.
(4) For the purposes of determination of undisclosed income,––
(a) of a firm, such income assessed for each of the tax years falling
within the block period shall be the income determined before allowing
deduction of salary, interest, commission, bonus or remuneration, by
whatever name called, to any partner not being a working partner;
(b) the provisions of sections 102, 103, 104 and 105 shall, so far as
may be, apply and reference to tax year in those sections shall be construed
as references to the relevant tax year falling in the block period;
(c) the provisions of section 166 shall, so far as may be, apply and
reference to tax year in that section shall be construed as reference to the
relevant tax year falling in the block period excluding the period referred to
in sub-section (3).
(5) The tax referred to in section 292(7) shall be charged on the total income
pertaining to the block period determined in the manner specified in
sub-section (1) as reduced by the total income referred to in clause (b), (c) and (d)
of the said sub-section.
(6) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (5), the following shall be
ignored:––
(a) the undisclosed income declared under sub-section (1)(a) is a
loss; or
(b) the income disclosed in respect of any tax year comprising the
block period is a loss; or
(c) the returned income or assessed income under sub-section (1)(b)
or (c) is a loss; or
(d) the income as determined under of sub-section (1)(d) is a loss.
(7) For the purposes of assessment, losses brought forward from the tax year
(prior to the first tax year comprising the block period) under Chapter VII or
unabsorbed depreciation under section 33(11) shall not be set off against the
undisclosed income determined in the block assessment under this Chapter.
(8) Losses or unabsorbed depreciation as referred to in sub-section (7) may
be carried forward for being set off in the tax year subsequent to the tax year in
which the block period ends, for the remaining period, taking into account the
block period and such tax year, and as per the provisions of this Act.

334

Procedure for
block
assessment.

294. (1) Where any search has been initiated or requisition is made in
the case of any person, then,––
(a) the Assessing Officer shall, in respect of such search or
requisition, issue a notice to such person, requiring him to furnish within
a period specified in the notice, not exceeding sixty days, a return in the
form and verified in the manner, as prescribed, setting forth his total
income, including the undisclosed income, for the block period, and––
(i) such return shall be considered as if it was a return
furnished under section 263 and thereafter notice under section
270(8) shall be issued;

5

10

(ii) any return furnished beyond the period allowed in the
notice shall not be deemed to be a return under section 259;
(iii) no notice under section 280 is required to be issued for
the purpose of proceeding under this Chapter;
(iv) a person who has furnished a return under this clause
shall not be entitled to furnish a revised return;
(b) the Assessing Officer shall proceed to determine the total
income including the undisclosed income of the block period in the
manner laid down in section 293 and the provisions of sections 268,
270(8), 270(10), 271, 276, 287 and 288 shall, so far as may be, apply;

15

20

(c) the Assessing Officer, on determination of the total income
of the block period as per this Chapter, shall pass an order of
assessment or reassessment and determine the tax payable by him on
the basis of such assessment or reassessment, so, however that—
(i) the provisions of section 275 shall not apply in respect
of such order;
(ii) where the order of assessment or reassessment is made
in pursuance of section 295, the block period for such
assessment or reassessment shall be the same as that determined
in respect of the person in whose case search was initiated or
requisition was made and proceedings under the said section
were initiated due to such search or requisition;

25

30

(d) the assets seized under section 247 or requisitioned under
section 248 shall be dealt with as per section 250.
(2) The provisions of section 270(1) shall not apply to the return furnished
under this section.

35

(3) The Assessing Officer, before issuance of notice under sub-section (1)(a),
shall take prior approval of the Additional Commissioner or the Additional Director
or the Joint Commissioner or the Joint Director.
Undisclosed
income of any
other person.

295. Where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that any undisclosed income
belongs to or pertains to or relates to any person, other than the person with respect
to whom search was initiated or requisition was made, then––
(a) any money, bullion, jewellery, virtual digital asset or other
valuable article or thing, or assets, or books of account, other documents, or
any information contained therein, seized or requisitioned shall be handed
over to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such other
person; and
(b) such other person referred to in clause (a) shall be assessed under
section 294 and the provisions of this Chapter shall apply accordingly.

40

45

335

296. (1) Irrespective of the provisions of section 296, the order under
section 294 shall be passed within twelve months from the end of the month in
which the last of the authorisations for search was executed, or requisition was
made.
5

(2) Where search was initiated or requisition was made, and during the
course of assessment or reassessment of the total income of the relevant block
period, any reference under section 166(1) is made, the period available for
completion of such assessment or reassessment proceeding shall be extended by
twelve months.

10

(3) In computing the period of limitation under sub-section (1), the period
(not exceeding one hundred eighty days) commencing from the date on which a
search is initiated or a requisition is made and ending on the date on which seized
or requisitioned items are handed over to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction
over the assessee shall be excluded.

15

(4) If after exclusion of the period referred to in sub-section (3), the remaining
period of limitation for completion of assessment or reassessment, expires before
the end of a month, such period shall be extended to end of such month.

20

25

(5) The period of limitation for completion of assessment or reassessment for
the block period in the case of the other person referred to in section 295 shall be
twelve months from the end of the month in which the notice under section 294 in
pursuance of section 295, was issued to such other person.
(6) The period available for completion of assessment or reassessment
proceeding in respect of the block period in a case referred to in sub-section (5)
shall be extended by twelve months, where a reference under section 166(1) is
made in such case.
(7) In computing the period of limitation under this section, the following
period shall be excluded,—

30

35

(a) the period commencing on the date on which stay on assessment
proceeding was granted by an order or injunction of any court and ending
on the date on which certified copy of the order vacating the stay was
received by jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner;
(b) the period commencing from the date on which a first of the
reference for exchange of information (made by an authority competent
under an agreement referred to in section 159) is made and ending with the
date on which such information requested is last received by the
jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner or one year,
whichever is less;
(c) the time taken in reopening the whole or any part of the proceeding or
giving an opportunity to the assessee to be re-heard under section 244(2);

40

45

(d) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing
Officer directs the assessee to get his accounts audited or inventory valued
under section 268(5) and—
(i) ending with the last date on which the assessee is required to
furnish a report of such audit or inventory valuation under that
sub-section; or
(ii) where such direction is challenged before a court, ending
with the date on which the certified copy of the order setting aside
such direction is received by the jurisdictional Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner;

Time-limit for
completion of
block
assessment.

336

(e) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing
Officer makes a reference to the Valuation Officer under section 269(1) and
ending with the date on which the report of the Valuation Officer is received
by the Assessing Officer;
(f) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing
Officer intimates the Central Government or the prescribed authority, the
contravention of the provisions of Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 23, 24 or 25)
as referred to in section 270(11)(i) and ending with the date on which the
copy of the order withdrawing the approval or rescinding the notification,
under those clauses is received by the Assessing Officer;
(g) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing
Officer makes a reference to the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner
as per section 270(13) and ending with the date on which the copy of the
order under section 351(2)(ii)(A) or (B), is received by the Assessing
Officer;
(h) the period commencing from the date on which a reference for
declaration of an arrangement to be an impermissible avoidance
arrangement is received by the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner under section 274(1) and ending on the date on which a
direction under sub-section (3) or (6) or an order under sub-section (5) of
the said section is received by the Assessing Officer;
(i) the period commencing from the date on which an application is
made before the Board for Advance Rulings under section 381(1) and
ending with the date on which the order rejecting the application is received
by the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner under
section 384(5);
(j) the period commencing from the date on which an application is
made before the Board for Advance Rulings under section 381(1) and
ending with the date on which the advance ruling pronounced by it is
received by the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner
under section 384(8).
(8) Where immediately after the exclusion of the period referred to in
sub-section (7), the remaining period of limitation referred to in sub-section (1)
or (5) available to the Assessing Officer for completion of assessment under
section 294 is less than sixty days, such remaining period shall be extended to
sixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to be extended
accordingly.
(9) Where after extension of the period referred to in sub-section (8), the
period of limitation for making an order of assessment or reassessment, expires
before the end of a month, such period shall be extended to the end of such month.
Certain
interests and
penalties not
to be levied or
imposed.
Levy of
interest and
penalty
incertain
cases.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

297. Interest under section 423, 424 or 425 or penalty under section 439
shall not be levied or imposed upon the assessee for the undisclosed income
assessed or reassessed for the block period.
298. (1) Where the return of total income as required under a notice under
section 294(1)(a), is not furnished within the period specified in such notice, or is
not furnished, then,—
(a) the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 1.5%
of the tax on undisclosed income determined under clause (c) of said subsection;

45

337

(b) the interest in clause (a) shall be paid for every month or part of a
month comprised in the period commencing on the day immediately
following the expiry of the time specified in said notice, and ending on the
date of completion of assessment under clause (c) of said sub-section.
5

10

(2) The Assessing Officer or the Commissioner (Appeals) in the course of
any proceedings under this Chapter, may direct that the person shall pay by way
of penalty a sum which shall be equal to 50% of tax so leviable in respect of the
undisclosed income determined by the Assessing Officer under section 294(1)(c).
(3) The order imposing penalty under this section or section 444(1) or 450
or 451 or 452 shall not be made for the block period in respect of a person, if—
(a) such person has furnished a return under section 294(1)(a);
(b) the tax payable on the basis of such return has been paid or, if the
assets seized consist of money, the assessee offers the money so seized to
be adjusted against the tax payable;

15

(c) evidence of tax paid is furnished along with the return; and
(d) an appeal is not filed against the assessment of that part of income
which is shown in the return.

20

(4) The provisions of the sub-section (3) shall not apply where the
undisclosed income determined by the Assessing Officer is in excess of the
income shown in the return and in such cases the penalty shall be imposed on that
portion of undisclosed income determined, which is in excess of income shown
in the return.
(5) The order imposing a penalty under sub-section (2) shall not be made—

25

(a) unless an assessee has been given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard;
(b) by the Deputy Commissioner or Assistant Commissioner or the
Deputy Director or Assistant Director, where penalty exceeds two lakh
rupees except with the previous approval of the Additional Commissioner
or the Additional Director or the Joint Commissioner or the Joint Director;

30

(c) in a case where the assessment is the subject-matter of an appeal
under section 357 or 362,—
(i) after the expiry of the financial year in which the proceedings,
in the course of which action for the imposition of penalty has been
initiated, are completed; or

35

(ii) six months from the end of the financial year in which the
order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal is
received by the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner,
whichever period expires later;

40

45

(d) in a case where the assessment is the subject-matter of revision
under section 377, after the expiry of six months from the end of the
financial year in which such order of revision is passed;
(e) in any case other than those mentioned in clause (c) and clause (d),
after the expiry of the financial year in which the proceedings, in the course
of which notice for the imposition of penalty has been issued, are completed,
or six months from the end of the financial year in which notice for
imposition of penalty is issued, whichever period expires later.

338

(6) In computing the period of limitation under this section, the following
period shall be excluded––
(a) the time taken in giving an opportunity to the assessee to be reheard
under section 244(2);
(b) the period commencing on the date on which stay on proceeding
under sub-section (2) was granted by an order or injunction of any court and
ending on the date on which certified copy of the order vacating the stay
was received by jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner.
(7) Where immediately after the exclusion of the period referred to in
sub-section (6), the remaining period of limitation referred to in sub-section (5)
available to the Assessing Officer for making an order under sub-section (2) of
this section is less than sixty days, such remaining period shall be extended to
sixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to be extended
accordingly.
(8) If after exclusion of the period referred to in sub-section (7), the
remaining period of limitation for making of an order for imposition of penalty
expires before the end of a month, such remaining period shall be extended to the
end of such month.
(9) An income-tax authority on making an order under sub-section (2)
imposing a penalty, unless he is himself an Assessing Officer, shall forthwith send
a copy of such order to the Assessing Officer.
Authority
competent to
make
assessment of
block period.

Application of
other
provisions of
Act.
Interpretation.

5

10

15

20

299. (1) The order of assessment for the block period shall be passed by an
Assessing Officer not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner or an Assistant
Commissioner or a Deputy Director or an Assistant Director.
(2) The order referred to in sub-section (1) shall be passed with the previous
approval of the Additional Commissioner or the Additional Director or the Joint
Commissioner or the Joint Director, in respect of search initiated or requisition
made on or after the commencement of this Act.
300. Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all other provisions of this
Act shall apply to assessment made under this Chapter.

25

30

301. In this Chapter––
(a) “block period” means the aggregate of––
(i) the period comprising six tax years preceding the tax year in
which the search was initiated or any requisition was made; and
(ii) the period starting from the 1st April of the tax year in which
search was initiated or requisition was made and ending on the date of
the execution of the last of the authorisations for such search or such
requisition;
(b) “requisition” means requisition of books of account, other
documents or any assets under section 248;

35

40

(c) “requisitioned items” means the books of account, or other
documents or money or bullion or jewellery or other valuable article or thing
requisitioned under section 248;
(d) “search” means a search initiated under section 247;
(e) “seized items” means the books of account, or other documents or
money or bullion or jewellery or other valuable article or thing seized under
section 247;
(f) “the last of the authorisations” shall be deemed to have been
executed,—

45

339

(i) in the case of search, on the conclusion of search as recorded
in the last panchnama drawn in relation to any person in whose case
the warrant of authorisation has been issued, irrespective of whether
or not any seizure is recorded in such panchnama;
5

(ii) in the case of requisition, on the actual receipt of the books
of account or other documents or assets by the Authorised Officer; and
(g) “undisclosed income” includes––

10

15

(i) any money, bullion, jewellery, virtual digital asset or other
valuable article or thing or any expenditure or any income based on any
entry in the books of account or other documents or transactions, where
such money, bullion, jewellery, virtual digital asset, valuable article,
thing, entry in the books of account or other document or transaction
represents wholly or partly income or property which has not been or
would not have been disclosed for the purposes of this Act, in respect of
the block period; or
(ii) any expense, exemption, deduction or allowance claimed under
this Act which is found to be incorrect, in respect of the block period.
CHAPTER XVII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN PERSONS

20

A.—Association of persons, firm, Hindu undivided family, etc.
1.—Legal representatives
302. (1) Where a person dies, his legal representative shall be liable to pay
any sum which the deceased would have been liable to pay if he had not died, in
the like manner and to the same extent as the deceased.

25

30

(2) For the purposes of making an assessment (including an assessment,
reassessment or recomputation under section 279) of the income of the deceased
and for the purpose of levying any sum in the hands of the legal representative as
per the provisions of sub-section (1), any proceeding––
(a) taken against the deceased before his death shall be deemed to have
been taken against the legal representative and may be continued against the
legal representative from the stage at which it stood on the date of the death
of the deceased;
(b) which could have been taken against the deceased if he had
survived, may be taken against the legal representative; and

35

(c) all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(3) The legal representative of the deceased shall be deemed to be an
assessee for the purposes of this Act.

40

(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (5), (6) and (7), the liability of
a legal representative referred to in sub-section (1) shall be limited to the extent
to which the estate of the deceased is capable of meeting the liability.
(5) Every legal representative shall be personally liable for any sum payable
by him in his capacity as legal representative if, while such liability remains
undischarged, he creates a charge on or disposes of or parts with any assets of the
estate of the deceased, which are in, or may come into, his possession.

45

(6) The liability of a legal representative referred to in sub-section (5) shall
be limited to the value of the asset so charged, disposed of or parted with.

Legal
representative.

