467

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1)(a), the court competent to try offences
under section 520,—

5

(a) which has been designated as a Special Court under this section, shall
continue to try the offences before it or offences arising under this Act after
such designation;
(b) which has not been designated as a Special Court, shall continue to
try such offence pending before it till its disposal.

46 of 2023.
10

46 of 2023.

15

20

497. The Special Court, irrespective of anything contained in the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall try an offence under this Chapter
punishable with imprisonment not exceeding two years or with fine, or with
both, as a summons case, and the provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023 as applicable in the case of trial of summons case, shall apply
accordingly.

Trial of offences
as summons
case.

498. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (including the provisions as to bails or bonds),
shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and the person conducting
the prosecution before the Special Court, shall be deemed to be a Public
Prosecutor.

Application of
Bharatiya
Nagarik
Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023
to proceedings
before Special
Court.

(2) The Central Government may also appoint a Special Public Prosecutor for
any case or class or group of cases.
(3) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor
or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section unless he has been in practice
as an advocate for not less than seven years, requiring special knowledge
of law.

25
46 of 2023.

(4) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public
Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the
meaning of section 2(v) of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, and the
provisions of that Sanhita shall have effect accordingly.
CHAPTER XXIII

30

35

MISCELLANEOUS
499. (1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding under this Act or after
the completion thereof, but before the service of notice by the Tax Recovery Officer
as per the procedure specified under section 413, any assessee creates a charge on,
or parts with the possession of, any of his assets in favour of any other person, such
charge or transfer shall be void as against any claim in respect of any tax or any
other sum payable by the assessee as a result of the completion of the said
proceeding or otherwise.
(2) The charge or transfer as referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be void if
it is made—

40

(a) for adequate consideration and without notice of the pendency of
such proceeding or, as the case may be, without notice of such tax or other
sum payable by the assessee; or
(b) with the previous permission of the Assessing Officer.

45

(3) This section applies to cases where the amount of tax or other sum payable
or likely to be payable exceeds five thousand rupees and the assets charged or
transferred exceed ten thousand rupees in value.

Certain
transfers to be
void.

468

(4) In this section,––
(a) “assets” means land, building, machinery, plant, shares, securities
and fixed deposits in banks, virtual digital asset, to the extent to which any of
the said assets does not form part of the stock-in-trade of the business of the
assessee; and

5

(b) the modes of creating a charge on or parting with the possession of such
assets shall include sale, mortgage, gift, exchange or any other mode of transfer.
Provisional
attachment to
protect revenue
in certain cases.

500. (1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding for—
(a) the assessment of any income or for the assessment or reassessment
of any income, which has escaped assessment; or

10

(b) imposition of penalty under section 444, where the amount or
aggregate of amounts of penalty likely to be imposed under the said section
exceeds two crore rupees,
the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that for protecting the interests of the revenue
it is necessary so to do, he may, with the previous approval of the Competent
Authority by order in writing, attach provisionally any property belonging to the
assessee in the manner prescribed in section 413.
(2) Every provisional attachment under sub-section (1) shall cease to have
effect after the expiry of six months from the date of the order made under the said
sub-section.

15

20

(3) The Competent Authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
extend the period referred to in sub-section (2) and the total period of such extension
shall not exceed two years or sixty days after the date of order of assessment or
reassessment, whichever is later.
(4) Where the assessee furnishes a guarantee from a scheduled bank for an
amount not less than the fair market value of the property provisionally attached
under sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer shall, by an order in writing, revoke
such attachment.
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (4), where the Assessing Officer is satisfied
that a guarantee from a scheduled bank for an amount lower than the fair market
value of the property is sufficient to protect the interests of the revenue, he may
accept such guarantee and revoke the attachment.
(6) The Assessing Officer may, for determining the value of the property
provisionally attached under sub-section (1), make a reference to the Valuation
Officer, who shall estimate the fair market value of the property in the manner
provided under section 269(3) to (8), and submit a report of such estimate to the
Assessing Officer within thirty days from the date of receipt of the reference.

25

30

35

(7) An order revoking the provisional attachment under sub-section (4) or (5)
shall be made—
(a) within forty-five days from the date of receipt of the guarantee, where
a reference to the Valuation Officer has been made under sub-section (6); or

40

(b) within fifteen days from the date of receipt of guarantee, in any
other case.
(8) Where a notice of demand specifying a sum payable is served upon the
assessee and the assessee fails to pay that sum within the time specified, the
Assessing Officer may invoke the guarantee furnished under sub-section (4) or (5),
wholly or in part, to recover the amount.

45

469

(9) The Assessing Officer shall, in the interests of revenue, invoke the bank
guarantee, if the assessee fails to renew the guarantee referred to in sub-section (4)
or (5), or fails to furnish a new guarantee from a scheduled bank for an equal
amount, before fifteen days of its expiry.
5

(10) The amount realised by invoking the guarantee referred to in
sub-section (4) or (5) shall be adjusted against––
(a) the existing demand which is payable by the assesse; and

10
2 of 1934.

15

(b) the balance amount, if any, shall be deposited in the Personal Deposit
Account of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner in the branch of the
Reserve Bank of India or the State Bank of India or any bank as may be
appointed by the Reserve Bank of India as its agent under section 45(1) of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 at the place where the office of the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner is situated.
(11) Where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the guarantee referred to in
sub-section (4) or (5) is not required any more to protect the interests of the revenue,
he shall release that guarantee forthwith.
(12) In this section, “Competent Authority” means the Principal Chief
Commissioner or Chief Commissioner, Principal Commissioner or Commissioner,
Principal Director General or Director General or Principal Director or Director.

20

501. (1) The service of a notice, or summon, or requisition, or order, or any
other communication, under this Act may be made by delivering or transmitting a
copy thereof, to the person therein named—

Service of
notice,
generally.

(a) by post or by such courier services as may be approved by the
Board; or
5 of 1908.

25

(b) as provided under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for the purposes
of service of summons; or
(c) in the form of any electronic record as provided in Chapter IV of the
Information Technology Act, 2000; or

21 of 2000.

(d) by any other means of transmission of documents, as prescribed.
30

35

40

45

(2) The Board may make rules providing for the addresses (including the
address for electronic mail or electronic mail message) to which the communication
referred to in sub-section (1) may be delivered or transmitted to the person therein
named.
(3) In this section, “electronic mail” and “electronic mail message” means a
message or information created or transmitted or received on a computer, computer
system, computer resource or communication device including attachments in text,
image, audio, video and any other electronic record, which may be transmitted with
the message.
502. (1) Where this Act requires a notice or other document to be issued by
any income-tax authority, such notice or other document shall be signed and issued
in paper form or communicated in electronic form by that authority as per such
procedure, as prescribed.
(2) Every notice or other document to be issued, served or given under this
Act by any income-tax authority, shall be deemed to be authenticated, if the name
and office of a designated income-tax authority is printed, stamped or otherwise
written thereon.
(3) In this section, “designated income-tax authority” means any income-tax
authority authorised by the Board to issue, serve or give such notice or other
document after authentication in the manner as provided in sub-section (2).

Authentication
of notices and
other
documents.

470

Service of notice
when family is
disrupted or firm
etc., is dissolved.

503. (1) After a finding of total partition has been recorded by the Assessing
Officer under section 315 for any Hindu family, notices under this Act in respect of
the income of the Hindu family shall be served on the person, who was its last
manager, or, if such person is dead, then on all adults who were members of the
Hindu family immediately before the partition.

5

(2) Where a firm or other association of persons is dissolved, notices under
this Act for the income of such firm or association may be served on any person,
who was a partner (not being a minor) or member of the association, immediately
before its dissolution.
Service of notice
in case of
discontinued
business.

504. Where an assessment is to be made under section 320, the Assessing
Officer may serve on the—

10

(a) person whose income is to be assessed; or
(b) person who was a member of a firm or association of persons at
the time of its discontinuance, in the case of a firm or an association of
persons; or

15

(c) principal officer, in case of a company,
a notice containing all or any of the requirements which may be included in a notice
under section 268(1) and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply
accordingly as if the notice were a notice issued under that sub-section.
Submission of
statement by a
non-resident
having liaison
office.

Furnishing of
information or
documents by an
Indian concern
in certain cases.

505. Every person, being a non-resident, having a liaison office in India set up
as per the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India under the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999, shall, in respect of its activities in a tax year,
prepare and deliver to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction, within sixty days
from the end of such tax year, a statement, in such form and containing such
particulars, as prescribed.

20
42 of 1999.

25

506. Where,––
(a) any share of, or interest in, a company or an entity registered or
incorporated outside India, derives, directly or indirectly, its value
substantially from the assets located in India, as referred to in
section 9(9)(a); and

30

(b) such company or, entity, holds, directly or indirectly, such assets in
India through, or in, an Indian concern,
then, such Indian concern shall, for the determination of any income accruing or
arising in India under the said clause, furnish within such period, the information
or documents in such manner, as prescribed, to the prescribed income-tax
authority.
Submission of
statements by
producers of
cinematograph
films or persons
engaged in
specified
activity.

507. (1) Any person carrying on the production of a cinematograph film or
engaged in any specified activity, or both, during the whole or any part of any tax
year shall, furnish within such period, a statement in such form and in such manner,
as prescribed, to the prescribed income-tax authority.

35

40

(2) The statement referred in sub-section (1) shall contain particulars of all
payments of over fifty thousand rupees in the aggregate made by him or due from
him to each such person as is engaged by him in such production or
specified activity.
(3) In this section, “specified activity” means any event management,
documentary production, production of programmes for telecasting on television or
over the top platforms or any other similar platform, sports event management, other
performing arts or any other activity as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify.

45

471

508. (1) Any person, being—
(a) an assessee; or
(b) the prescribed person, in the case of an office of Government; or
(c) a local authority or other public body or association; or
16 of 1908.

(d) the Registrar or Sub-Registrar appointed under section 6 of the
Registration Act, 1908; or

59 of 1988.

(e) the registering authority empowered to register motor vehicles under
Chapter IV of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; or

5

43 of 2023.

10

(g) the Collector referred to in section 3(g) of the Right to Fair
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2013; or

30 of 2013.

42 of 1956.

(f) the Director General as referred to in section 2(a) of the Post Office
Act, 2023; or

15

(h) the recognised stock exchange referred to in section 2(f) of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956; or

2 of 1934.

(i) an officer of the Reserve Bank of India, constituted under section 3
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or

22 of 1996.

(j) a depository referred to in section 2(1)(e) of the Depositories
Act, 1996; or
20

(k) a prescribed reporting financial institution; or
(l) any other person, as prescribed,

25

30

who is responsible for registering, or, maintaining books of account or other
document containing a record of any specified financial transaction or any
reportable account, as prescribed, under any law in force, shall furnish a statement
regarding such specified financial transaction or such reportable account, which is
registered or recorded or maintained by him and information relating to which is
relevant and required for this Act, to the income-tax authority or such other
authority or agency, as prescribed.
(2) The statement referred to in sub-section (1) shall be furnished for such
period, within such time and in the form and manner, as prescribed.
(3) In sub-section (1), “specified financial transaction” means any
transaction—
(a) of purchase, sale or exchange of goods or property or right or interest
in a property; or

35

(b) for rendering any service; or
(c) under a works contract; or
(d) by way of an investment made or an expenditure incurred; or
(e) for taking or accepting any loan or deposit,
as prescribed.

40

(4) The Board may prescribe different values for different transactions
specified in sub-section (3) for different persons having regard to the nature of such
transaction.

Obligation to
furnish
statement of
financial
transaction or
reportable
account.

472

(5) If the prescribed income-tax authority finds a defect in the statement
furnished under sub-section (1), he may intimate the defect to the person furnishing
such statement, to rectify the defect within thirty days from the date of such
intimation, and at his discretion, extend the said period upon an application made
for this purpose.

5

(6) If the defect mentioned in sub-section (5) remains unrectified within the
initial period of thirty days or extended period as applicable, then, the provisions of
this Act shall apply as if such person had furnished inaccurate information in the
statement, irrespective of anything contained in any other provision of this Act.
(7) If a person required to furnish a statement under sub-section (1) fails to do
so within the specified time, the prescribed income-tax authority may serve upon
such person a notice requiring him to furnish such statement, within a period not
exceeding thirty days from the date of service of notice, and he shall furnish the
statement within the time specified therein.

10

(8) If a person, having furnished a statement under sub-section (1), or in
pursuance of a notice issued under sub-section (7), becomes aware of any
inaccuracy in the information provided, he shall within ten days, inform the
prescribed income-tax authority or other authority or agency referred to in
sub-section (1), of the inaccuracy and furnish the correct information in such
manner, as prescribed.

15

20

(9) The Central Government may, specify by rules,—
(a) the persons referred to in sub-section (1) to be registered with the
prescribed income-tax authority;
(b) the nature of information and the manner in which such information
shall be maintained by the persons referred to in clause (a); and

25

(c) the due diligence to be carried out by the persons for the identification
of any reportable account referred to in sub-section (1).
Obligation to
furnish
information on
transaction of
crypto-asset.

509. (1) Any person, being a reporting entity, as prescribed, in respect of a
crypto-asset, shall furnish information in respect of a transaction of such
crypto-asset in a statement, for such period, within such time, in such form and
manner and to such income-tax authority, as prescribed.

30

(2) Where the prescribed income-tax authority considers that the statement
furnished under sub-section (1) is defective, he may intimate the defect to the person
who has furnished such statement and give him an opportunity of rectifying the
defect within thirty days from the date of such intimation or such further period as
may be allowed, and if the defect is not rectified within such period, the provisions
of this Act shall apply as if such person had furnished inaccurate information in the
statement.

35

(3) Where a person who is required to furnish a statement under
sub-section (1) has not furnished the same within the specified time, the prescribed
income-tax authority may serve upon such person a notice requiring him to furnish
such statement within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of service of
such notice and he shall furnish the statement within the time specified in the notice.

40

(4) If any person, having furnished a statement under sub-section (1), or in
pursuance of a notice issued under sub-section (3), comes to know or discovers any
inaccuracy in the information provided in the statement, he shall within ten days
inform the prescribed income-tax authority, the inaccuracy in such statement and
furnish the correct information in such manner as prescribed.

45

(5) The Central Government may, by rules prescribe—

473

(a) the persons referred to in sub-section (1) to be registered with the
prescribed income-tax authority;
(b) the nature of information and the manner in which such information
shall be maintained by the persons referred to in clause (a); and
5

(c) the due diligence to be carried out by the persons referred to in
sub-section (1) for the purpose of identification of any crypto-asset user or owner.
(6) In this section, “crypto-asset” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 2(111)(d).

10

15

20

510. (1) The prescribed income-tax authority or the person authorised by such
authority, shall upload in the registered account of the assessee an annual
information statement in such form and manner, within such time and along with
such information, which is in the possession of an income-tax authority, as
prescribed.
(2) In sub-section (1), “registered account” means the electronic filing account
registered by the assessee in the web portal, as may be designated by the prescribed
income-tax authority or the person authorised by such authority.
511. (1) Every constituent entity resident in India, shall, if it is constituent of
an international group, the parent entity of which is not resident in India, notify the
prescribed income-tax authority in the form and manner, on or before such date, as
prescribed,—
(a) whether it is the alternate reporting entity of the international
group; or

25

(b) the details of the parent entity or the alternate reporting entity, if any,
of the international group, and the country or territory of which the said entities
are resident.

30

(2) Every parent entity or the alternate reporting entity, resident in India, shall,
for every reporting accounting year, in respect of the international group of which
it is a constituent, furnish a report, to the prescribed income-tax authority within
twelve months from the end of the said reporting accounting year, in such form and
manner, as prescribed.
(3) In sub-sections (2) and (4), the report in respect of an international group
shall include—

35

40

(a) the aggregate information in respect of the amount of revenue, profit
or loss before income-tax, amount of income-tax paid, amount of income-tax
accrued, stated capital, accumulated earnings, number of employees and
tangible assets not being cash or cash equivalents, with regard to each country
or territory in which the group operates;
(b) the details of each constituent entity of the group including the
country or territory in which such constituent entity is incorporated or
organised or established and the country or territory where it is resident;
(c) the nature and details of the main business activity or activities of
each constituent entity; and
(d) any other information, as prescribed.

45

Annual
information
statement.

(4) A constituent entity of an international group, resident in India, other than
the entity referred to in sub-section (2), shall furnish the report referred to in the said
sub-section, in respect of the international group for a reporting accounting year
within the period, as prescribed, if the parent entity is resident of a country or
territory,—

Furnishing of
report in respect
of international
group.

474

(a) where the parent entity is not obligated to file the report of the nature
referred to in the said sub-section;
(b) with which India does not have an agreement providing for exchange
of the report of the nature referred to in the said sub-section;
(c) where there has been a systemic failure and such failure has been
intimated by the prescribed income-tax authority to such constituent entity.

5

(5) If there are more than one such constituent entities of the group, resident
in India, the report as mentioned in sub-section (4) shall be furnished by any one
constituent entity, if—
(a) the international group has designated such entity to furnish the
report as per sub-section (2) on behalf of all the constituent entities resident in
India; and

10

(b) the information has been conveyed in writing on behalf of the group
to the prescribed income-tax authority.
(6) The provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5) shall not apply, if—

15

(a) an alternate reporting entity of the international group has furnished
a report of the nature referred to in sub-section (2), with the tax authority of
the country or territory in which such entity is resident, on or before the date
specified by that country or territory; and
(b) the following conditions are satisfied:—

20

(i) the said report is required to be furnished under any law in force
in the said country or territory;
(ii) the said country or territory has entered into an agreement with
India providing for exchange of the said report;
(iii) the prescribed income-tax authority has not conveyed any
systemic failure in respect of the said country or territory to any
constituent entity of the group that is resident in India;
(iv) the said country or territory has been informed in writing by
the constituent entity that it is the alternate reporting entity on behalf of
the international group; and

25

30

(v) the prescribed income-tax authority has been informed by
the entity referred to in sub-sections (4) and (5) as per
sub-section (1).
(7) The prescribed income-tax authority may, for determining the accuracy of
the report furnished by any reporting entity, issue notice in writing, requiring the
entity to produce such information and document as specified in the notice within
thirty days of the date of receipt of the notice and such period may be extended by
up to an additional thirty days upon application by the entity.
(8) The provisions of this section shall not apply to an international group for
an accounting year, if the total consolidated group revenue, as per the consolidated
financial statement for the accounting year preceding such accounting year, does
not exceed the prescribed amount.

35

40

(9) The provisions of this section shall be applied as per such guidelines and
subject to such conditions, as prescribed.
(10) In this section,—
(a) “accounting year” means,—

45

475

(i) a tax year, in a case where the parent entity is resident in India; or
(ii) an annual accounting period, with respect to which the parent
entity of the international group prepares its financial statements under
any law in force or the applicable accounting standards of the country or
territory of which such entity is resident, in any other case;

5

(b) “agreement” means a combination of all of the following
agreements:—
(i) an agreement entered into under section 159(1) or (2); and
(ii) an agreement for exchange of the report referred to in
sub-section (2) and notified by the Central Government;

10

(c) “alternate reporting entity” means any constituent entity of the
international group that has been designated by such group, in the place of the
parent entity, to furnish the report of the nature referred to in sub-section (2)
in the country or territory in which the said constituent entity is resident on
behalf of such group;

15

(d) “constituent entity” means—
(i) any separate entity of an international group that is included in
the consolidated financial statement of the said group for financial
reporting purposes, or may be so included for the said purpose, if the
equity share of any entity of the international group were to be listed on
a stock exchange;

20

(ii) any such entity that is excluded from the consolidated financial
statement of the international group solely on the basis of size or
materiality; or
(iii) any permanent establishment of any separate business entity
of the international group included in sub-clause (i) or (ii), if such
business unit prepares a separate financial statement for such permanent
establishment for financial reporting, regulatory, tax reporting or
internal management control purposes;

25

(e) “group” includes a parent entity and all the entities in respect of
which, for the reason of ownership or control, a consolidated financial
statement for financial reporting purposes—

30

(i) is required to be prepared under any law in force or the
accounting standards of the country or territory of which the parent
entity is resident; or

35

(ii) would have been required to be prepared, had the equity shares
of any of the enterprises were listed on a stock exchange in the country
or territory of which the parent entity is resident;
(f) “consolidated financial statement” means the financial statement of
an international group in which the assets, liabilities, income, expenses and
cash flows of the parent entity and the constituent entities are presented as
those of a single economic entity;

40

(g) “international group” means any group that includes—
(i) two or more enterprises which are resident of different countries
or territories; or
(ii) an enterprise, being a resident of one country or territory, which
carries on any business through a permanent establishment in other
countries or territories;

45

476
(h) “parent entity” means a constituent entity, of an international group
holding, directly or indirectly, an interest in one or more of the other
constituent entities of the international group, such that—
(i) it is required to prepare a consolidated financial statement under
any law in force or the accounting standards of the country or territory
of which the entity is resident; or

5

(ii) it would have been required to prepare a consolidated financial
statement had the equity shares of any of the enterprises were listed on
a stock exchange,
and, there is no other constituent entity of such group which, due to ownership of
any interest, directly or indirectly, in the first mentioned constituent entity, is
required to prepare a consolidated financial statement, under the circumstances
referred to in sub-clause (i) or (ii), that includes the separate financial statement of
the first mentioned constituent entity;

10

(i) “permanent establishment” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 173(c);

15

(j) “reporting accounting year” means the accounting year in respect of
which the financial and operational results are required to be reflected in the
report referred to in sub-sections (2), (4) and (5);

Publication of
information
respecting
assessees in
certain cases.

Appearance by
registered valuer
in certain
matters.

(k) “reporting entity” means the constituent entity including the parent
entity or the alternate reporting entity, that is required to furnish a report of the
nature referred to in sub-section (2);
(l) “systemic failure” with respect to a country or territory means that
the country or territory has an agreement with India providing for exchange of
report of the nature referred to in sub-section (2), but—
(i) in violation of the said agreement, it has suspended automatic
exchange; or
(ii) has persistently failed to automatically provide to India the
report in its possession in respect of any international group having a
constituent entity resident in India.
512. (1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or
expedient in the public interest to publish the names of any assessees and any other
particulars relating to any proceedings or prosecutions under this Act in respect of
such assessees, it may publish such names and particulars in such manner as it
thinks fit.
(2) No publication under this section shall be made for any penalty imposed
under this Act, until the time for filing an appeal under section 356 or 357 has
expired and no appeal has been filed, or if an appeal is filed, it has been
disposed of.
(3) The names of the partners of the firm, directors, managing agents,
secretaries and treasurers, or managers of the company, or the members of the
association, as the case may be, may also be published under sub-section (1), if, in
the opinion of the Central Government, the circumstances of the case justify it.
513. (1) Any assessee, entitled or required to attend before any income-tax
authority or the Appellate Tribunal in matters relating to the valuation of any asset,
may attend through a registered valuer.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply, where the assessee is
required to attend personally for examination on oath or affirmation under
section 246.
(3) In this section, “registered valuer” means a person registered as a valuer
under section 514.

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

477

514. (1) The Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner, or the
Principal Director General or Director General, shall maintain a register of valuers
in which the names and addresses of persons registered under sub-section (2) shall
be entered.
5

(2) Any person, possessing such qualification for valuing such class of assets,
may apply to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner, or the
Principal Director General or Director General, for getting registered as a valuer, in
such form, verified in such manner and accompanied by such fee, as prescribed,
along with a declaration stating that the applicant will––

10

(a) conduct an impartial and true valuation of any asset required to be
valued;

Registration of
valuers.

(b) furnish a valuation report in the prescribed form;
(c) charge fees not exceeding the prescribed rate or rates; and
15

(d) refrain from undertaking the valuation of any asset in which such
person has a direct or indirect interest.
(3) The valuation report prepared by a registered valuer for any asset shall be
in such form and verified in such manner, as prescribed.

20

515. (1) An assessee, entitled or required to attend before any income-tax
authority or the Appellate Tribunal for any proceeding under this Act, may attend
through an authorised representative.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply where an assessee is
required to attend personally for examination on oath or affirmation under
section 246.
(3) In this section,––

25

(a) “authorised representative” means a person authorised by the
assessee, in writing, to appear on his behalf, being—
(i) a person related to or regularly employed by the assessee in any
manner; or

30

(ii) any officer of a scheduled bank with which the assessee
maintains a current account or has other regular dealings; or
(iii) any legal practitioner, who is entitled to practise in any civil
court in India; or
(iv) an accountant; or

35

(v) any person, who has passed any accountancy examination
recognised by the Board; or
(vi) any person, who has acquired such educational qualifications,
as prescribed; or

43 of 1961.
40

11 of 1922.

45

(vii) any person who, before the coming into force of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 in the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli,
Goa, Daman and Diu, or Pondicherry, attended before an income-tax
authority in the said territory on behalf of any assessee otherwise than as
an employee or relative of that assessee; or
(viii) any other person who, immediately before the coming into
force of the said Act, was an income-tax practitioner as per
section 61(2)(iv) of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, and was actually
practising as such;
(ix) any other person as prescribed;

Appearance by
authorised
representative.

478
(b) “accountant” means a chartered accountant as defined in
section 2(1)(b) of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, who holds a valid
certificate of practice under section 6(1) of that Act, but does not include
[except for representing the assessee under sub-section (1)],—
(i) in case of an assessee, being a company, a person who is not
eligible for appointment as an auditor of the said company under
section 141(3) of the Companies Act, 2013; or

38 of 1949

5
18 of 2013.

(ii) in any other case,—
(A) the assessee himself, or in the case of being a firm or
association of persons or a Hindu undivided family, any partner of
such firm or a member of such association or such Hindu
undivided family;

10

(B) for an assessee, being a trust or institution, any person
referred to in section 355(h)(i) or (ii) or (iii) or (iv);
(C) for any person other than the persons referred to in
sub-clauses (A) and (B), the person who is competent to verify the
return under section 263 as per section 265;

15

(D) any relative of any of the persons referred to in
sub-clauses (A), (B) and (C);
(E) an officer or employee of the assessee;

20

(F) an individual, who, is a partner, or who is in the
employment, of an officer or employee of the assessee;
(G) an individual, who or his relative or partner—
(I) is holding any security of, or interest in, the assessee
and the face value of such security or interest held by his
relative does not exceed one lakh rupees;

25

(II) is indebted to the assessee, and such debt in case of
his relative does not exceed one lakh rupees;
(III) has given a guarantee or provided security in
connection with the indebtedness of a third person to the
assessee and such relative gives a guarantee or provides
security for an amount not exceeding one lakh rupees;

30

(H) a person who, whether directly or indirectly, has business
relationship with the assessee of such nature, as prescribed;
(I) a person convicted by a court of an offence involving
fraud and ten years has not elapsed from the date of such
conviction.

35

(4) No person,—
(a) who has been dismissed or removed from Government service; or
(b) who has been convicted of an offence connected with any
income-tax proceeding or on whom a penalty has been imposed under this
Act, except a penalty imposed under section 275(1)(ii) of the Income-tax
Act, 1961 or section 465(1)(d); or

40

43 of 1961.

(c) who has become an insolvent; or
(d) who has been convicted by a court for an offence involving fraud,

45

479

shall be qualified to represent an assessee under sub-section (1), for––
(i) all times, in case of a person referred to in clause (a);
5

(ii) for such time as the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner may by order
determine, in case of a person referred to in clause (b);
(iii) for the period during which the insolvency continues, in case of a
person referred to in clause (c); and

10

(iv) for ten years from the date of conviction, in case of a person referred
to in clause (d).
(5) If a person,—

15

20

(a) who is a legal practitioner or an accountant, is found guilty of
misconduct in his professional capacity by any authority authorised to institute
disciplinary proceedings against him, the order passed by that authority shall
affect his right to attend before an income-tax authority in the same manner as
it affects his right to practise as a legal practitioner or accountant, as the case
may be;
(b) who is not a legal practitioner or an accountant, and is found guilty
of misconduct in any income-tax proceedings by the prescribed income-tax
authority, may be directed by such authority that he shall henceforth be
disqualified from representing an assessee under sub-section (1).
(6) Every order or direction under sub-section (4)(b) or (5)(b) shall be subject
to the following conditions:—

25

(a) no such order or direction shall be made against any person unless
he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard;
(b) any person against whom such an order or direction is made may,
within one month of the said order or direction, appeal to the Board to have
the order or direction cancelled; and

30

(c) no such order or direction shall take effect until one month has passed
from the making thereof, or, if an appeal has been filed, until the disposal of
the appeal.
(7) A person disqualified to represent an assessee by virtue of section 61(3) of
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or section 288(5) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall
be disqualified to represent an assessee under sub-section (1).

11 of 1922.
43 of 1961.
35

(8) In this section, “relative”, in relation to an individual, means—
(a) spouse of the individual;
(b) brother or sister of the individual;
(c) brother or sister of the spouse of the individual;
(d) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual;

40

(e) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the individual;
(f) spouse of a person referred to in clauses (b), (c), (d) or (e);
(g) any lineal descendant of a brother or sister of either the individual or
the spouse of the individual.

45

516. The amount of total income computed or any amount payable or
refundable under this Act, shall be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ten rupees
ignoring any part of a rupee consisting of paise and thereafter if such amount is not
a multiple of ten, then—

Rounding off of
amount of total
income, or tax
payable or
refundable.

480

(a) such amount shall be increased to the next higher amount which is a
multiple of ten, if the last figure in that amount is five or more; or
(b) such amount shall be reduced to the next lower amount which is a
multiple of ten, if the last figure is less than five,
and the amount so rounded off shall be deemed to be the total income of the assessee
or the amount payable and refund due, under this Act.
Receipt to be
given.
Indemnity.

Power to tender
immunity from
prosecution.

5

517. A receipt shall be given for any money paid or recovered under this Act.
518. Every person deducting, retaining, or paying any tax in pursuance of this
Act in respect of an income belonging to another person shall be indemnified for the
deduction, retention, or payment thereof.

10

519. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that with a view
to obtaining the evidence of any person appearing to have been directly or indirectly
concerned in or privy to the concealment of income or to the evasion of payment of
tax on income it is necessary or expedient so to do, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, tender to such person,—

15

(a) immunity from prosecution for any offence under this Act or under
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or under any other Central Act in
force; and
(b) from imposition of any penalty under this Act on condition of his
making a full and true disclosure of the whole circumstances relating to the
concealment of income or evasion of payment of tax on income.
(2) A tender of immunity made to, and accepted by, the person concerned,
shall, to the extent to which the immunity extends, render him immune from
prosecution for any offence in respect of which the tender was made, or from the
imposition of any penalty under this Act.

45 of 2023.

20

25

(3) If it appears to the Central Government that any person to whom immunity
has been tendered under this section––
(a) has not complied with the conditions on which the tender was made; or
(b) is wilfully concealing anything; or
(c) is giving false evidence,

30

the Central Government may record a finding to that effect, and thereupon the
immunity shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.
(4) The person whose immunity has been withdrawn under sub-section (3)
may be tried for the offence in respect of which the tender of immunity was made
or for any other offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection with
the same matter and shall also become liable to imposition of any penalty under this
Act to which he would otherwise have been liable.
Cognizance of
offences.

520. No court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try
any offence under this Act.

Probation of
Offenders Act,
1958 and section
401 of Bharatiya
Nagarik
Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023,
not to apply.

521. The provisions of section 401 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023 and the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 shall not apply to a person
convicted of an offence under this Act unless that person is under eighteen years of
age.

35

40
20 of 1958.
46 of 2023.

481

5

10

15

522. No return of income, assessment, notice, summons or other proceeding,
furnished or made or issued or taken, or purported to have been furnished or made
or issued or taken, in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, shall be invalid
or shall be considered to be invalid merely by reason of any mistake, defect or
omission in such return of income, assessment, notice, summons or other
proceeding, if such return of income, assessment, notice, summons or other
proceeding is in substance and effect in conformity with or according to the intent
and purposes of this Act.

Return of
income, etc., not
to be invalid on
certain grounds.

523. (1) Where an assessee has appeared in any proceeding or co-operated
in any inquiry relating to an assessment or reassessment, it shall be deemed that
any notice under this Act, which is required to be served upon him, has been
duly served upon him in time as per the provisions of this Act and such assessee
shall be precluded from taking any objection in any proceeding or inquiry under
this Act that the notice was—

Notice deemed
to be valid in
certain
circumstances.

(a) not served upon him; or
(b) not served upon him in time; or
(c) served upon him in an improper manner.

20

25

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply where the assessee
has raised such objection before the completion of such assessment or
reassessment.
524. (1) Where any books of account, other documents money, bullion,
jewellery, virtual digital asset or other valuable article or thing, is found in the
possession or control of any person in the course of a search under section 247 or
survey under section 253, it may, in any proceeding under this Act, be presumed—

Presumption as
to assets, books
of account, etc.

(a) that such books of account, other document, money, bullion,
jewellery, virtual digital asset or other valuable article or thing belong or
belongs to such person;
30

(b) that the contents of such books of account and other document
are true;

35

(c) that the signature and every other part of such books of account and
other document, which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular
person, or which may reasonably be assumed to have been signed by, or to be
in the handwriting of, any particular person, are in the handwriting of that
person; and
(d) in the case of a document stamped, executed or attested, that it was
duly stamped and executed or attested by the person by whom it purports to
have been so executed or attested article or thing belong or belongs to such
person;

40

45

(2) Where any books of account, other documents or assets have been
delivered to the requisitioning officer as per section 248, then, the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall apply as if such books of account, other documents or assets,
which had been taken into custody from the person referred to in sub-section (1)(a)
or (b) or (c) of the said section, had been found in the possession or control of that
person in the course of a search under section 247.
525. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in this Act,—
(a) it shall not be necessary to issue an authorisation under
section 247 or make a requisition under section 248 separately in the
name of each person;

Authorisation
and assessment
in case of search
or requisition.

482

(b) where an authorisation under section 247 has been issued or
requisition under section 248 has been made mentioning therein the name of
more than one person, the mention of such names of more than one person on
such authorisation or requisition shall not be considered to construe that it was
issued in the name of an association of persons or body of individuals
consisting of such persons.
(2) Irrespective of an authorisation issued under section 247 or a requisition
made under section 248 mentioning therein the name of more than one person, the
assessment or reassessment shall be made separately in the name of each of the
persons mentioned in such authorisation or requisition.
Bar of suits in
civil courts.

526. No suit shall be brought in any civil court to set aside or modify any
proceeding taken or order made under this Act, and no prosecution, suit or other
proceeding shall lie against the Government or any officer of the Government
for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

Power to make
exemption, etc.,
in relation to
participation in
business of
prospecting for,
extraction, etc.,
of mineral oils.

527. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient
in the public interest, it may, by notification, make an exemption, reduction in rate,
or other modification of income-tax for any class of persons specified in
sub-section (2) or in regard to the whole or any part of the income of such class of
persons or the status in which such class of persons or the members thereof are to
be assessed on their income from the business referred to in sub-section (2)(a),
effective from tax year beginning on or after 1st April, 1992.

5

10

15

20

(2) The persons referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following:—
(a) persons with whom the Central Government has entered into
agreements for the association or participation of that Government, or any
person authorised by that Government in any business of prospecting for or
extraction or production of mineral oils;
(b) persons providing any services or facilities or supplying any ship,
aircraft, machinery or plant (whether by sale or hire) for any business
consisting of the prospecting for or extraction or production of mineral oils
carried on by that Government, or any person specified by that Government
by notification; and

25

30

(c) employees of the persons referred to in clause (a) or (b).
(3) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid before each House
of Parliament.
(4) In this section,—

35

(a) “mineral oil” includes petroleum and natural gas;
(b) “status” means the category of person as defined in section 2(77)
under which the assessee is assessed.
Power of Central
Government or
Board to condone
delays in
obtaining approval.

528. Where, the approval of the Central Government or the Board is required
to be obtained before a specified date under this Act, it shall be open to the Central
Government or the Board to condone, for sufficient cause, any delay in obtaining
such approval.

Power to
withdraw
approval.

529. Where the Central Government or the Board or an income-tax authority,
has the power to grant any approval under any provision of this Act to any assessee,
the Central Government or the Board or such income-tax authority may, withdraw
such approval at any time after recording the reasons therefor, even if such provision
does not specifically allow for its withdrawal, after giving such assessee a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.

40

45

483

5

10
43 of 1961.

15

530. If on the 1st April in any tax year, provision has not yet been made by a
Central Act for the charging of income-tax for that tax year, this Act shall
nevertheless have effect until such provision is so made, as if the provision in force
in the preceding tax year or the provision proposed in the Bill then before
Parliament, whichever is more favourable to the assessee, were actually in force.

Act to have
effect pending
legislative
provision for
charge of tax.

531. Where the Central Government considers it necessary or expedient so to
do may, by general or special order, rescind an exemption, reduction in rate or other
modification in respect of income-tax or super-tax in favour of any assessee or class
of assessees or in regard to the whole or any part of the income of any assessee or
class of assesses, made as per the provisions of section 294A of the Income-tax
Act, 1961.

Power to rescind
exemption in
relation to certain
Union territories
already granted
under section
294A of the
Income-tax Act,
1961.

532. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make a scheme for
any of the purposes of this Act, so as to impart greater efficiency, transparency
and accountability by—

Power to frame
schemes.

(a) eliminating the interface with the assessee or any other person to
the extent technologically feasible;
(b) optimising utilisation of the resources through economies of scale
and functional specialisation.

20

43 of 1961.
25

30

35

40

(2) The Central Government may, for the purposes of giving effect to the
scheme made under sub-section (1), by notification, direct that any of the
provisions of this Act shall not apply or shall apply with such exceptions,
modifications and adaptations as specified in the notification.
(3) Where a scheme has been notified under the provisions of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 with a view to eliminating the interface with the assessee
or any other person, the Central Government may by notification amend or
modify the said scheme as per the provisions of sub-section (1), and the
provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply accordingly.
(4) Every notification issued under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall, as
soon as may be after the notification is issued, be laid before each House of
Parliament.
533. (1) The Board may, subject to the control of the Central Government, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters:—
(a) the ascertainment and determination of any class of income;
(b) the manner in which and the procedure by which the income shall be
arrived at in the case of—
(i) income derived in part from agriculture and in part from
business;
(ii) persons residing outside India;
(iii) operations carried out in India by a non-resident;
(iv) transactions or activities of a non-resident;
(v) an individual who is liable to be assessed under
section 99(3) and (4);

45

(c) the determination of the value of any perquisite chargeable to tax
under this Act in such manner and on such basis as appears to the Board to be
proper and reasonable;

Power to make
rules.

484

(d) the percentage on the written down value which may be allowed as
depreciation for buildings, machinery, plant or furniture;
(e) the matters specified in section 62;
(f) the conditions or limitations subject to which any payment of rent
made by an assessee shall be deducted under section 134;

5

(g) the matters specified in Chapter XI;
(h) the time within which any person may apply for the allotment of a
Permanent Account Number, the form and the manner in which such
application may be made and the particulars which such application shall
contain and the transactions with respect to which Permanent Account
Number shall be quoted on documents relating to such transactions under
section 262;
(i) the documents, statements, receipts, certificates or audited reports
which may not be furnished along with the return but shall be produced before
the Assessing Officer on demand under section 263(2)(a);
(j) the class or classes of persons who shall be required to furnish the
return of income in electronic form; the form and the manner of furnishing the
said return in electronic form; documents, statements, receipts, certificates or
reports which shall not be furnished with the return in electronic form and the
computer resource or electronic record to which such return may be
transmitted under section 263(2)(a);

10

15

20

(k) the cases, the nature and value of assets, the limits and heads of
expenditure and the outgoings, which are required to be prescribed under
section 263(2)(b);
(l) the form of the report of audit or inventory valuation and the
particulars which such report shall contain under section 268(5);
(m) remuneration of Chairperson and members of the Approving Panel
under section 274(21) and procedure and manner for constitution of,
functioning and disposal of references by, the Approving Panel under
section 274(24);

25

30

(n) the form and manner in which the information relating to payment of
any sum may be furnished under section 397(3)(d);
(o) the authority to be prescribed for any of the purposes of this Act;
(p) the procedure for giving effect to any agreement for the granting of
relief in respect of double taxation or for the avoidance of double taxation
entered into by the Central Government under this Act;

35

(q) the procedure for granting of relief or deduction, of any income-tax
paid in any country or specified territory outside India, under section 159 or
160, against the income-tax payable under this Act;
(r) the form and manner in which any application, claim, return or
information may be made or furnished and the fees that may be levied in
respect of any application or claim;

40

(s) the manner in which any document required to be filed under this Act
may be verified;
(t) the procedure to be followed on applications for refunds;

45

485

5

(u) the procedure for calculating interest payable by assessees or by the
Government to assessees under this Act, including the rounding off of periods
when a fraction of a month is involved, and specifying the circumstances
under which and the extent to which petty amounts of interest payable by
assessees may be ignored;
(v) the regulation of any matter for which provision is made in
section 420;

10

(w) the form and manner in which any appeal or cross-objection may be
filed under this Act, the fee payable in respect thereof and the manner in which
intimation referred to in section 358(3)(b) may be served;
(x) the circumstances, conditions and the manner in which, the Joint
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) may permit an
appellant to produce evidence which he did not produce or which he was not
allowed to produce before the Assessing Officer;

15

20

(y) the form in which the statement under section 507 shall be delivered
to the Assessing Officer;
(z) the maintenance of a register of persons other than legal practitioners
or accountants practising before income-tax authorities and for the
constitution of and the procedure to be followed by the authority referred to in
section 515(5);
(za) the issue of certificate verifying the payment of tax by assessees;
(zb) any other matter which by this Act is to be, or may be, prescribed.

25

(3) In cases, where the income liable to tax cannot be definitely ascertained,
or can be ascertained only with an amount of trouble and expense to the assessee,
which is unreasonable, the rules made under this section may—
(a) prescribe methods by which an estimate of such income may be
made; and

30

(b) in cases of income derived in part from agriculture and in part from
business, specify the proportion of the income which shall be considered to be
income liable to tax,
and an assessment based on such estimate or proportion shall be considered to be
duly made as per this Act.

35

(4) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power
to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement
of this Act, to the rules or any of them and, unless the contrary is permitted (whether
expressly or by necessary implication), no retrospective effect shall be given to any
rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of assessees.
534. The Central Government shall cause––
(a) every rule made under this Act;

40

(b) rules of procedure framed by the Appellate Tribunal under
section 364; or
(c) every notification issued under sections 263(3) and 264 and
Chapter XIII-G,

Laying before
Parliament.

486

to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in such rule, or notification
or both Houses agree that the rule, should not be made or the notification should not
be issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule or notification.
Removal of
difficulties.

5

10

535. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by general or special order, do anything not
inconsistent with the provisions which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
the purpose of removing the difficulty.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
any order referred to in sub-section (1) may provide for the adaptations or modifications
subject to which the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall apply in relation to the assessments for
the tax year ending on the 31st March, 2026, or any earlier tax year.
(3) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made after the expiration of three
years from the 1st April, 2026.

15
43 of 1961.

20

(4) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Repeal and
savings.

43 of 1961.

536. (1) The Income-tax Act, 1961 is hereby repealed.
(2) Irrespective of the repeal of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred
to as the repealed Income-tax Act), and subject to sub-section (3)—

43 of 1961.
25

(a) affect the previous operation of the repealed Act and orders or
anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or
(b) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or
incurred under the repealed Act or orders under such repealed Act;
(c) the provisions of the repealed Income-tax Act shall continue to apply
to any proceedings (including notices, assessment, re-assessment,
rectification, penalty, reference, revision and appeals) in respect of any tax
year beginning before the 1st April, 2026 and such proceedings shall be
carried out as per the procedure specified in the repealed Income-tax Act;

30

(d) any proceeding for the imposition of a penalty in respect of any tax
year beginning before the 1st April, 2026, may be initiated and any such
penalty may be imposed under the repealed Income-tax Act, as if this Act had
not been enacted;

35

(e) any proceeding pending on the commencement of this Act before any
income-tax authority or any other authority constituted under the repealed
Income-tax Act, Appellate Tribunal, or any court, by way of application,
appeal, reference or revision or by any other means, shall be continued and
disposed of as if this Act had not been enacted;
(f) any election or declaration made, or option exercised, by an assessee
under any provision of the repealed Income-tax Act and in force immediately
before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been an election
or declaration made, or option exercised, under the corresponding provision
of this Act;

40

45

487

(g) where in respect of any proceeding relating to any tax year beginning
before the 1st April, 2026,—
(i) a refund falls due after commencement of this Act; or
5

(ii) default is made after such commencement in the payment of
any sum due under such proceeding,
the provisions of this Act, relating to interest payable by the Central Government on
refunds and interest payable by the assessee for default, shall apply for the period
after the commencement of this Act;

10

15

(h) where any deduction has been allowed or any amount has not been
included in the total income of any person, subject to fulfilment of certain
conditions for any tax year beginning before the 1st April, 2026, and in case
of violation of such conditions in any tax year beginning on or after
1st April, 2026, any sum (on account of deduction earlier allowed or amount
not included) was required to be included in the total income of such
subsequent tax year under the repealed Income-tax Act if it had not been so
repealed, then such sum shall be—
(i) deemed to be the income of the tax year in which the violation
takes place; and

20

(ii) included in the total income of the said person under the same
head of income as it would have been included under the repealed
Income-tax Act;
(i) any sum payable under the repealed Income-tax Act may be
recovered under this Act without prejudice to any action already taken for the
recovery of such sum under repealed Income-tax Act;

25

30

35

40
43 of 1961.

(j) any agreement entered into, appointment made, approval given,
recognition granted, direction, instruction, notification, order or rule issued
under any provision of the repealed Income-tax Act shall, so far as it is not
inconsistent with the corresponding provisions of this Act, be deemed to have
been entered into, made, granted, given or issued under the corresponding
provision of this Act and shall continue in force accordingly;
(k) where the period provided for any application, appeal, reference or
revision under the repealed Income-tax Act had expired on or before the
commencement of this Act, nothing in this Act shall be construed as enabling
any such application, appeal, reference or revision to be made under this Act
by reason only of the fact that a longer period therefor is prescribed or
provision is made for extension of time in suitable cases by the appropriate
authority;
(l) any amount of credit, in respect of tax paid, allowable to be carried
forward in the case of an assessee, under the provisions of section 115 JAA or
115JD of the repealed Income-tax Act for the tax year beginning before the
1st April 2026, had the Income-tax Act, 1961 not been repealed,—
(i) shall be deemed to be the amount eligible for credit under
corresponding provision of this Act in the case of said assessee; and

45

(ii) credit for the tax paid under the repealed Income-tax Act shall
be allowed under this Act for the period for which it would have been
allowed under the repealed Income–tax Act if the assessee otherwise
continues to satisfy the conditions as specified in the corresponding
provisions of this Act in such tax years;

488

(m) any amount of loss under the source or head of income specified in
column B of the Table given below and referred to in the section of the
repealed Income-tax Act specified in column C of the said Table, brought
forward for the tax year beginning before the 1st April, 2026 had the
Income-tax Act not been repealed, shall be set off and carried forward against
the income computed under this Act , in the manner provided in the respective
section of the repealed Income-tax Act specified in column C of the said table,
for the tax years beginning on or after the 1st April, 2026:

5

Table
Sl.
No.

Source or head of income under the repealed
Income-tax Act

Section of the repealed
Income-tax Act

A

B

C

1.

Income from house property.

71B.

2.

Profits and gains of business or profession.

72.

3.

Speculation business.

73.

4.

Specified Business.

73A.

5.

Activity of owning and maintaining race horses.

74A.

(n) any amount of loss under the head capital gains, whether related to a
long-term capital asset or a short term capital asset, referred to in section 74
of the repealed Income-tax Act, brought forward from the tax year beginning
before the 1st April, 2026 had the Income-tax Act, 1961 not been repealed,
shall be set off and carried forward against the income under the head “Capital
gains” computed under this Act for any tax year beginning on or after the
1st April, 2026 upto eight financial years immediately succeeding the financial
year in which such loss was first computed under the repealed Income-tax Act;
(o) any set off of loss or allowance for depreciation made in any tax year
beginning before the 1st April, 2026 in the hands of the amalgamated
company, successor company or the successor limited liability partnership, in
accordance with the provisions of section 72A of the repealed Income-tax Act,
shall be deemed to be the income of the amalgamated company, successor
company or the successor limited liability partnership, as the case may be,
chargeable to tax under this Act for the year in which any of the conditions
specified in that section are not complied with;
(p) any set off of accumulated loss or unabsorbed depreciation allowed
in any tax year beginning before the 1st April, 2026 to the successor
co-operative bank, in accordance with the provisions of section 72AB of the
repealed Income-tax Act, shall be deemed to be the income of the successor
co-operative bank chargeable to tax under this Act for the year in which any
of the conditions specified in that section are not complied with;
(q) any amount of profits or gains arising out of transfer of capital asset
not charged under the head capital gains by virtue of the provisions contained
in section 47(iv), (v), (xiii), (xiiib) or (xiv) of the repealed Income-tax Act in
any tax year beginning before the 1st April, 2026 shall be deemed to be the
income chargeable under the head “Capital gains” under this Act , if any of
the conditions laid down in section 47A(1)(i) or (ii) of the repealed
Income-tax Act are satisfied or conditions laid down in section 47(xiii), (xiiib)
or (xiv), as the case may be, of the repealed Income-tax Act are not complied
with, for the tax year in which such conditions are satisfied or not complied
with, as the case may be;

10

15

20
43 of 1961.

25

30

35

40

45

489

5

10

15

20

25

(r) where any allowance or part thereof, under section 32(2) or 35(4) of
the repealed Income-tax Act, is to be carried forward to tax year beginning on
the 1st April, 2026, had the Income-tax Act not been repealed, then, the
allowance or part thereof shall be added to the amount of capital allowances
referred to corresponding provisions of this Act for the tax year beginning on
the 1st April, 2026 and deemed to be part of that allowance, or if there is no
such allowance for that tax year, be deemed to be allowance for that tax year;
(s) the deduction referred to in section 35ABB, 35D, 35DD, 35DDA,
35E or the first proviso to section 36(1)(ix) of the repealed Income-tax Act,
shall, on fulfilment of the conditions mentioned in the said provisions,
continue to be allowed under this Act for tax year beginning on or after the
1st April, 2026 had the Income-tax Act not been repealed and such deduction
shall be added to the amount of deferred revenue expenditure allowance
referred to corresponding provisions of this Act for the tax year beginning on
or after the 1st April, 2026 and deemed to be part of that allowance, or if there
is no such allowance for a tax year, be deemed to be that allowance for that
tax year;
(t) credit balance in the provision for bad and doubtful debts account
made under section 36(1)(viia) of the repealed Income-tax Act standing on the
last day of the tax year beginning on 1st April, 2025 shall be added to the
amount credited to the provision for bad and doubtful debts accounts referred
to in the corresponding provisions of this Act for the tax year beginning on the
1st April, 2026 and deemed to be part of amount credited to the provision for
bad and doubtful debts accounts, or if there is no such amount credited for that
tax year, be deemed to be amount credited for that tax year;
(u) any scheme which has been notified under the provisions of the
repealed Income-tax Act with a view to eliminating the interface with the
assessee or any other person, the said scheme shall be deemed to have
been made—

30

(i) under the corresponding provisions of this Act; or
(ii) under section 294B where there is no such corresponding
provision,
and shall continue in force accordingly; and

35

10 of 1897.

40

(v) where a search has been initiated under section 132 or requisition is
made under section 132A prior to the 1st April, 2026, the provisions of
repealed Income-tax Act, shall continue to apply to any proceedings connected
in respect of such search or requisition, as the case may be, as if this Act has
not been enacted.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply with regard to the effect
of repeal.

490

SCHEDULE I
[See section 9(12)]
CONDITIONS FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES NOT TO CONSTITUTE BUSINESS CONNECTION IN INDIA.
1. (1) The eligible investment fund referred to in section 9(12), means a fund
established or incorporated or registered outside India, which collects funds from its
members for investing it for their benefit and fulfils the following conditions:––
(a) the fund is not a person resident in India;
(b) the fund is––
(i) a resident of a country or a specified territory with which an
agreement referred to in section 159(1) or (2) has been entered into; or
(ii) established or incorporated or registered in a country or a
specified territory as notified in this behalf;
(c) the aggregate participation or investment in the fund, directly or
indirectly, by persons resident in India does not exceed 5% of the corpus of
the fund as on the 1st April and the 1st October of the tax year, subject to the
conditions that—
(i) for the purposes of calculation of such aggregate participation
or investment in the fund, any contribution made by the eligible fund
manager during the first three years of operation of the fund, not
exceeding twenty-five crore rupees, shall not be taken into account;
(ii) where the aforesaid aggregate participation or investment in
the fund exceeds 5% on the 1st April or the 1st October of the tax year,
the condition mentioned in this clause shall be deemed to be satisfied, if
it is satisfied, within four months of the 1st April or the 1st October of
such tax year;
(d) the fund and its activities are subject to applicable investor protection
regulations in the country or specified territory where it is established or
incorporated or is a resident;
(e) the fund has a minimum of twenty-five members who are, directly or
indirectly, not connected persons;
(f) any member of the fund along with connected persons shall not have
any participation interest, directly or indirectly, in the fund exceeding 10%;
(g) the aggregate participation interest, directly or indirectly, of ten or
less members along with their connected persons in the fund, shall be less
than 50%;
(h) the fund shall not invest more than 25% of its corpus in any entity;
(i) the fund shall not make any investment in its associate entity;
(j) the monthly average of the corpus of the fund shall not be less than
one hundred crore rupees subject to the following:––
(i) if the fund has been established or incorporated in the tax year,
then corpus of fund shall not be less than one hundred crore rupees at
the end of twelve months from the last day of the month of its
establishment or incorporation; and

490

491

(ii) this clause shall not apply to a fund which has been wound up
in the tax year;
(k) the fund shall not carry on or control and manage, directly or
indirectly, any business in India;
(l) the fund is neither engaged in any activity which constitutes a
business connection in India nor has any person acting on its behalf whose
activities constitute a business connection in India other than the activities
undertaken by the eligible fund manager on its behalf;
(m) the remuneration paid by the fund to an eligible fund manager in
respect of fund management activity undertaken by him on its behalf is not
less than the amount calculated in such manner, as prescribed.
(2) The conditions specified in paragraph (1)(e), (f) and (g) shall not apply, in
case of––
(a) an investment fund set up by the Government or the Central Bank of
a foreign State or a sovereign fund; or
(b) such other fund as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf, subject to conditions, if any.
(3) The eligible fund manager, referred to in section 9(12), in respect of an
eligible investment fund, means any person who is engaged in the activity of fund
management and fulfils the following conditions:––
(a) the person is not an employee of the eligible investment fund or a
connected person of the fund;
(b) the person is registered as a fund manager or an investment advisor
in accordance with the regulations as specified;
(c) the person is acting in the ordinary course of his business as a fund
manager;
(d) the person along with his connected persons shall not be entitled,
directly or indirectly, to more than 20% of the profits accruing or arising to
the eligible investment fund from the transactions carried out by the fund
through the fund manager.
(4) Every eligible investment fund shall, in respect of its activities in a tax
year, furnish within ninety days from the end of the tax year, a statement in the
prescribed form to the prescribed income-tax authority, containing information
relating to the fulfilment of the conditions specified in this Schedule, and also
provide such other relevant information or documents, as prescribed.
(5) The provisions of this Schedule shall apply as per such guidelines and in
such manner as the Board may prescribe in this behalf.
(6) The Central Government may, by notification, specify that any one or more
of the conditions specified in sub-paragraph (1) (other than at paragraph (1)(c)) or
(3) shall not apply or shall apply with such modifications, as specified in case of an
eligible investment fund and its eligible fund manager, if––
(i) the eligible fund manager is located in an International Financial
Services Centre; and
(ii) has commenced its operations on or before the 31st March, 2030.

492
2. In this Schedule,—
(a) “associate” means an entity in which a director or a trustee or a
partner or a member or a fund manager of the investment fund, or a director
or a trustee or a partner or a member of the fund manager of such fund, holds,
either individually or collectively, share or interest, being more than 15% of
its share capital or interest, as the case may be;
(b) “connected person” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 184(5);
(c) “corpus” means the total amount of funds raised for the purpose of
investment by the eligible investment fund as on a particular date;
(d) “entity” means any entity in which an eligible investment fund makes
an investment; and
(e) “specified regulations” means the Securities and Exchange Board of
India (Portfolio Managers) Regulations, 1993 or the Securities and Exchange
Board of India (Investment Advisers) Regulations, 2013, or such other
regulations made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
(15 of 1992), which may be notified in this regard.

493

SCHEDULE II
(See section 11)
INCOME NOT TO BE INCLUDED IN TOTAL INCOME
In computing the total income of a person for a tax year, the income mentioned in
column B of the Table below shall not be included, subject to fulfilment of the conditions
mentioned in column C of the said Table, and the expressions used in columns B and C of the said
Table, shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the Notes below the said Table.
Table
Sl.
No.

Income not to be included in
total income

Conditions

A

B

C

1.

Agricultural income.

Nil.

2.

Any sum received under a
life
insurance
policy,
including the sum allocated
by way of bonus on such
policy.

(a) The insurance policies, issued during the
period mentioned in column B of the table below, except
where such sum is received on the death of a person, or
under a life insurance policy issued by the International
Financial Services Centre insurance intermediary office,
including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such
policy, shall fulfil the conditions mentioned in
Column C thereof:
Sl.
No.

Period of
issue of
insurance
policy

Conditions of issuance policy

A

B

C

1.

1st
Premium to sum assured ratio
April, 2003 is <=20%
to
31st
March,
2012.

2.

1st
Premium to sum assured ratio
April, 2012 is <=10%
to
31st
March,
2013.

3.

1st
Premium to sum assured ratio is
April, 2013 <=15% for special policies; and
to
31st 10% for other policies.
January,
2021.

4.

1st
Unit linked insurance policy:—
February,
(A) premium to sum assured
2021
to
31st March, ratio is <=15% for special policies;
and 10% for other policies; and
2023.
493

494

A

B

C
A

B

C
(B) aggregate of premium for
all such policies (in all of the tax
years during the term of all of
such policies) is <=₹ 2,50,000.
Other than unit
insurance policy:—

linked

Premium to sum assured ratio
is <=15% for special policies; and
10% for other policies.
5.

On
or
Unit
linked
insurance
after the 1st policy:—
April,
(a) premium to sum assured
2023.
ratio is <=15% for special
policies; and 10% for other
policies; and
(b) aggregate of premium for
all such policies (in all of the tax
years during the term of all of
such policies) <=₹ 2,50,000.
Other than Unit
insurance policy:—

linked

(i) premium to sum assured
ratio is <=15% for special
policies; and 10% for other
policies; and
(ii) aggregate of premium for
all such policies (in all of the tax
years during the term of all of
such policies) is <=₹ 5,00,000;
(b) the following sums shall not be eligible for
exclusion from total income:––
(i) any sum received under section 127; and
(ii) any sum received under a Keyman insurance
policy.
Note:— For removal of difficulties, the Board may issue
guidelines with the previous approval of the Central
Government, which shall be binding on the income-tax
authorities and the assessee and every guideline issued
by the Board under this clause shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.

495

A
3.

B

C

Any payment from a
(a) The income by way of interest accrued during the
provident fund to which the tax year shall not be eligible for exclusion from total
Provident Funds Act, 1925 income where,––
(19 of 1925) applies, or from
(i) it is attributable to the contribution (including
any other provident fund set up
aggregate
thereof) made on or after the 1st April,
by the Central Government and
2021;
and
notified by it in this behalf.
(ii) such contribution exceeds––
(A) ₹5,00,000 in a tax year in such fund where
no contribution is made by the employer of such
person;
(B) ₹2,50,000 in other cases; and
(b) the amount of income to be excluded from total
income as referred to in clause (a) shall be computed in
such manner, as prescribed.

4.

The accumulated balance
(a) The income by way of interest accrued during the
due and becoming payable to an tax year shall not be eligible for exclusion from total
employee participating in a income where,––
recognised provident fund to
(i) it is attributable to contribution (including
the
extent
provided
in
aggregate thereof) made on or after the 1st
paragraph 8 of Part A of the
April, 2021; and
Schedule XI
(ii) such contribution exceeds––
(A) ₹ 5,00,000 in a financial year in such fund
where no contribution is made by the employer of such
person; or
(B) ₹ 2,50,000 in other cases; and
(b) the amount of income to be excluded from total
income as referred to in clause (a) shall be computed in
such manner as prescribed.

5.

Any payment from any
account opened as per the
Sukanya Samriddhi Account
Scheme, 2019 made under the
Government
Savings
Promotion
Act,
1873
(5 of 1873).

6.

Any payment from the
(a) Such payment is on closure of account of the
National Pension System Trust. assessee or on his opting out of the pension scheme
referred to in section 124; and

Nil.

(b) income shall be excluded to the extent it does not
exceed 60% of the total amount payable at the time of
such closure or his opting out of the scheme.

496

A

B

C

7.

Any payment from the
Agniveer Corpus Fund to a
person enrolled under the
Agnipath Scheme or to his
nominee.

Nil.

8.

Any payment from an
approved superannuation fund.

Such payment is made—
(a) on the death of a beneficiary; or
(b) to an employee in lieu of or in commutation of
an annuity on his retirement at or after a specified age
or on his becoming incapacitated prior to such
retirement; or
(c) by way of refund of contributions on the death
of a beneficiary; or
(d) by way of refund of contributions to an
employee on his leaving the service in connection
with which the fund is established otherwise than by
retirement at or after a specified age or on his
becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement, to
the extent to which such payment does not exceed the
contributions made prior to the commencement of this
Act and any interest thereon; or
(e) by way of transfer to the account of the
employee under a pension scheme referred to in
section 124 and notified by the Central Government
in this behalf.

9.
10.

Scholarships.
Any
payment
made,
whether in cash or in kind for
any award or reward.

Such scholarship is granted to meet the cost of
education.
Such payment is made––
(a) in pursuance of any award instituted in the
public interest by the Central Government or any State
Government or instituted by any other body and
approved by the Central Government in this behalf; or
(b) as a reward by the Central Government or any
State Government for such purposes as may be
approved by the Central Government in this behalf in
public interest.

11.

Income by way of interest,
premium on redemption or other
payment on such securities,
bonds, annuity certificates,
savings
certificates,
other
certificates issued by the Central
Government and deposits.

(a) It is notified by the Central Government; and
(b) exclusion from total income shall be allowed
subject to such conditions and limits as specified in the
said notification.

497

A
12.

B
Interest on Gold Deposit
Bonds issued under the Gold
Deposit Scheme, 1999 or
deposit certificates issued under
the Gold Monetisation Scheme,
2015 notified by the Central
Government.

C
Nil.

13.

Interest on bonds issued by a
As specified by the Central Government, by
local authority or by a State notification.
Pooled Finance Entity.

14.

Any income arising from the
The transfer of such asset takes place on or after the
transfer of a capital asset, being 1st April, 2002.
a unit of the Unit Scheme, 1964
referred to in Schedule I to the
Unit Trust of India (Transfer of
Undertaking and Repeal) Act,
2002 (58 of 2002).

15.

Any income arising from any
Such income shall not include any income which
specified service provided on or is chargeable to tax as royalty or fees for technical
after the date on which the services in India under this Act read with the agreement
provisions of Chapter VIII of the notified by the Central Government under section 159.
Finance Act, 2016 (28 of 2016)
comes into force and chargeable
to equalisation levy under that
Chapter

16.

Any income covered under
section 10(15)(iii) or (15)(iv)(c),
(15)(iv)(d), (15)(iv)(e), (15)(iv)
(f), (15)(iv) (g) or (15)(iv) (h) or
(36) of the Income-tax Act, 1961,
subject to the conditions as
provided therein.
Note 1: For the purposes of Sl. No. 2,––
(a) “Keyman insurance policy” means a life insurance policy––
(i)

taken by a person on the life of another person; and

(ii) such person is or was the employee of the first-mentioned person or is or
was connected in any manner with the business of the first-mentioned person; and
(iii) includes such policy which has been assigned to a person at any time during
the term of the policy, with or without any consideration;
(b) “actual capital sum assured” shall have the meaning assigned to it in paragraph 2(2)
of Schedule XV;
(c) “United Linked Insurance Policy” means a unit linked life insurance policy,––
(i)

which has components of both investment and insurance; and

(ii) is linked to a unit as defined in clause (ee) of regulation 3 of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Unit Linked Insurance Products)
Regulations, 2019 made under the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
Act, 1999(41 of 1999);
(d) “premium to sum assured ratio” shall mean the highest percentage of annual
premium payable to the actual capital sum assured, during the term of the policy;
(e) “special policy” means any policy issued on life of any person, who is—

498

(i) a person with disability or a person with severe disability as referred to in
section 154; or
(ii) suffering from disease or ailment as specified in the rules made under .
Note 2: For the purposes of Sl. No. 7,––
“Agniveer Corpus Fund” and “Agnipath Scheme” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in section 125.
Note 3: For the purposes of Sl. No. 11,––
“interest” includes hedging transaction charges on account of currency fluctuation.
Note 4: For the purposes of Sl. No. 13,––
“State Pooled Finance Entity” means such entity which is set up as per the guidelines
for the Pooled Finance Development Scheme notified by the Central Government in the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.
Note 5: For the purposes of Sl. No. 15,––
“specified service” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (i) of section 164
of the Finance Act, 2016 (28 of 2016).

499

SCHEDULE III
(See section 11)
INCOME NOT TO BE INCLUDED IN TOTAL INCOME OF ELIGIBLE PERSONS
In computing the total income of a tax year of any eligible person mentioned in column C of
the Table below, the income mentioned in column B of the said Table shall not be included, subject
to the conditions mentioned in column D of the said Table, and the expressions used in columns B
to D therein shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Notes below the said
Table.
Table
Sl.
No.

Income not to be
included in total income

Eligible persons

Conditions

A

B

C

D

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Any sum received by a
An individual
(a) Such sum is not covered under the
member
from
Hindu who is a member provisions of section 99(3) and (4); and
undivided family.
of
a
Hindu
(b) such sum has been paid out of––
undivided family.
(i) the income of the family; or
(ii) the income of the estate
belonging to the family, in the case of
any impartible estate.
Any sum received by a
A person who is
The sum received is as per the profitpartner towards his share a partner of a firm sharing ratio provided in the partnership
in the total income of the separately assessed deed.
firm.
as such—
Any amount received or
Any individual
No deduction of this amount was
receivable from the Central or his legal heir.
allowed earlier under this Act on
Government or a State
account of any loss or damage caused
Government or a local
by such disaster to such individual or
authority by way of
his legal heir.
compensation on account
of any disaster.
Any payment from the
Any employee,
(a) Such payment is on partial
National Pension System or an assessee, withdrawal made out of his account or
Trust under the pension being the guardian the account of the minor, as per the
scheme referred to in or parent of a terms and conditions specified under the
section 121.
minor.
Pension
Fund
Regulatory
and
Development Authority Act, 2013 (23
of 2013) and the regulations made
thereunder; and
(b) exclusion shall not exceed 25% of
the amount of contributions made by
him.
Daily
allowance
Any person by
Nil.
received
reason
of
his
membership
of
Parliament or of
any
State
Legislature or of
any
Committee
thereof.

499

500

A

B
allowance

C

D

6.

Any
received.

Any person by
reason
of
his
membership
of
Parliament under the
Members
of
Parliament
(Constituency
Allowance) Rules,
1986 made under the
Salary, Allowances
and Pension of
Members
of
Parliament
Act,
1954 (30 of 1954).

Nil.

7.

Any
constituency
Any person by
reason
of
his
allowance received.
membership of any
State
Legislature
under any State Act
or
rules
made
thereunder.

Nil.

8.

The value of any travel
concession or assistance.

An individual.

(a) Such sum is received by, or due
to, such individual—
(i) from his employer for himself
and his family, in connection with his
proceeding on leave to any place in
India;
(ii) from his employer or former
employer for himself and his family,
in connection with his proceeding to
any place in India after retirement
from service or after the termination
of his service;
(b) Such sum is subject to such
conditions as prescribed (including
conditions as to number of journeys and
the amount which shall be exempt per
head);
(c) The conditions in clause (b) shall
have regard to the travel concession or
assistance granted to the employees of
the Central Government; and
(d) Sum not included in the total
income shall in no case exceed the
amount of expenses actually incurred
for the purpose of such travel.

9.

Any allowances or
perquisites
paid
or
allowed as such outside
India by the Government.

A citizen of India.

Such sum is paid or allowed for
rendering service outside India.

501

A
10.

B

C

D

Income in the nature of
An
employee,
(a) Such perquisite is not provided
a perquisite.
being an individual. for by way of monetary payment, within
the meaning of section 17(1);
(b) the tax on such income actually
paid by his employer, at the option of
the employer, on behalf of such
employee; and
(c) such perquisite is paid
irrespective of section 200 of the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).

11.

Any special allowance
from employer.

An assessee.

(a) Such allowance is specifically
granted to meet expenditure actually
incurred on payment of rent (by
whatever name called) in respect of
residential accommodation occupied by
the assessee;
(b) such allowance is to such extent
as prescribed having regard to the area
or place in which such accommodation
is situate and other relevant
considerations;
(c) the residential accommodation
occupied by the assessee is not owned
by him; and
(d) the assessee has actually incurred
expenditure on payment of rent (by
whatever name called) in respect of the
residential accommodation occupied by
him.

12.

13.

Any special allowance
or benefit to the extent to
which such expenses are
actually incurred for that
purpose.

Any allowance.

An assessee.

(a) Such allowance or benefit is not
in the nature of a perquisite within the
meaning of section 17(1);
(b) Such allowance or benefit is
specifically granted to meet expenses
wholly, necessarily and exclusively
incurred in the performance of the
duties of an office or employment of
profit, as prescribed.

An assessee.

(a) Such allowance is granted to the
assessee to meet his personal
expenses:—
(i) at the place where the duties of
his office; or
(ii) at the place employment of
profit are ordinarily performed by
him; or

502

A

B

C

D
(iii) at the place where he
ordinarily resides; or
(iv) to compensate him for the
increased cost of living,
to the extent as prescribed; and

14.

Pension received

(b) personal allowance to remunerate
or compensate for performing duties of a
special nature relating to office or
employment shall not be excluded from
total income unless such allowance is
related to the place of his posting or
residence.
An
individual
Nil.
who has been in the
service of the Central
Government or State
Government and has
been
awarded
"Param
Vir
Chakra" or "Maha
Vir Chakra" or "Vir
Chakra" or such
other
gallantry
award as the Central
Government may, by
notification, specify
in this behalf.

15.

Family
received.

pension

Any member of
the family of an
individual referred
against
serial
number 14.

Nil.

16.

Family
received.

pension

Widow
or
children
or
nominated heirs of a
member of the
armed
forces
(including
paramilitary forces)
of the Union.

The death of such member has
occurred in the course of operational
duties in such circumstances and
subject to such conditions, as
prescribed.

17.

Any income includible
In case of an
Exclusion of such income from the
in the total income under assessee referred to total income is to the extent such
section 99 (1)(d).
in that sub-section
income does not exceed ₹ 1,500 in
respect of each minor child whose
income is so includible.

18.

Any
income
An individual or
(a) Such land is situated in any area
chargeable under the a Hindu undivided referred to in section 2(22)(iii);
head “Capital gains” family.
(b) such land, during the period of
arising from the transfer
two years immediately preceding the
of agricultural land.
date of transfer, was being used for
agricultural purposes by such Hindu
undivided family or individual or a
parent of his;

503

A

19.

B

Any income which
accrues or arises—

C

D

(c) such transfer is by way of
compulsory acquisition under any law, or a
transfer, the consideration for which is
determined or approved by the Central
Government or the Reserve Bank of
India; and
(d) such income has arisen from the
compensation or consideration for such
transfer received by such assessee on or
after the 1st April, 2004.
A member of a
Nil.
Scheduled Tribe,—

(a) as defined in
(a) from any source
article
366(25) of the
in the areas or States
Constitution;
and
mentioned in column C;
(b) residing in any
or
area specified in Part
(b) by way of
I or II of the Table
dividend or interest on
appended
to
securities.
paragraph 20 of the
Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution or in the
States of Arunachal
Pradesh, Manipur,
Mizoram, Nagaland
and Tripura or in the
areas covered by
notification
No.
TAD/R/35/50/109,
dated
the
23rd
February,
1951,
issued
by
the
Governor of Assam
under the proviso to
the said paragraph
20(3) [as it stood
immediately before
the commencement
of the North-Eastern
Areas
(Reorganisation)
Act, 1971 (18 of
1971) or in the Union
territory of Ladakh].
20.

Any income which
An
individual,
accrues or arises—
being a Sikkimese.
(a) from any
source in the State of
Sikkim; or
(b) by way of
dividend or interest
on securities

Nil.

504

A
21.

B

C

D

An assessee who
The amount of any
(a) Such scheme is for replantation or
carries
on
the replacement of tea bushes, rubber plants,
subsidy received from
or
through
the business of growing coffee plants, cardamom plants or plants
concerned
Board and manufacturing for the growing of such other commodity
tea, rubber, coffee,
under a scheme.
cardamom or such or for rejuvenation or consolidation of
other commodity in areas used for cultivation of tea, rubber,
India as notified by coffee, cardamom or such other
the
Central commodity;
Government.

(b) such scheme is notified by the
Central Government; and
(c) the assessee furnishes to the
Assessing Officer, along with his return
of income for the tax year concerned or
within such further time as the Assessing
Officer may allow, a certificate from the
concerned Board, as to the amount of
such subsidy paid to the assessee during
the tax year.

22.

Any
The income which is
authority.
chargeable under the
head “Income from
house
property”,
“Capital gains” or
“Income from other
sources” or from a trade
or business.

local

Income from trade or business is
eligible for exclusion from total income
if such income accrues or arises from the
supply of––
(a) a commodity or service (not being
water or electricity) within its own
jurisdictional area; or
(b) water or electricity within or
outside its own jurisdictional area.

23.

A
research
Any income of a
(a) Applies its income or accumulates
research association. association for the it for application, wholly and
time being approved exclusively to the objects for which it is
for the purpose of established;
section 45(3)(a).
(b) invests its funds received in the
forms or modes specified in section 350;
(c) satisfies such conditions as
prescribed; and.
(d) the procedure for withdrawal of
approval granted shall be in such manner
as prescribed.

24.

An association or
Any income (other
(a) the association or institution
than
income institution
applies its income, or accumulates it for
chargeable under the established in India application, solely to the objects for
head “Income from having as its object which it is established;
the
control,
house property” or any supervision,
(b) the association or institution is for
income received for regulation
or the time being approved by the Central
rendering any specific encouragement
of
services or income by the profession of, Government by general or special order;
way of interest or law,
medicine, and
accountancy,
dividends
derived
(c) the procedure for withdrawal of
from its investments) engineering or
approval granted shall be in such
manner, as prescribed.

505

A

B

C

D

architecture or such
other profession as
the
Central
Government may,
by
notification
specify in this
behalf
25.

Any
income
attributable to the
business of production,
sale, or marketing, of
khadi or products of
village industries.

An
institution
constituted as a
public charitable
trust or registered
under the Societies
Registration Act,
1860 (21 of 1860),
or under any other
law corresponding
to that Act in force
in any part of India.

(a) Such institution exists solely for
the development of khadi or village
industries or both, and not for profit;
(b) such institution applies its income,
or accumulates it for application, solely
for the development of khadi or village
industries, or both;
(c) such institution is approved for
such purpose by the Khadi and Village
Industries Commission for a period not
exceeding 3 tax years at any one time;
and
(d) the procedure for withdrawal of
approval granted shall be in such manner
as prescribed.

26.

Any income from
the
activity
of
securitisation.

A securitisation
trust.

27.

Any income, by
way of contributions
received
from
recognised
stock
exchanges and the
members thereof.

Any
Investor
Protection
Fund
set
up
by
recognised stock
exchanges
in
India,
either
jointly
or
separately.

(a) Such fund is notified by the
Central Government; and

Any income, by
way of contributions
received
from
commodity
exchanges and the
members thereof.

Any
Investor
Protection Fund set
up by commodity
exchanges in India,
either jointly or
separately.

(a) Such fund is notified by the Central
Government; and
(b) where any amount standing to the
credit of the said Fund and not charged
to income-tax during any tax year is
shared, either wholly or in part, with a
commodity exchange, the whole of the
amount so shared shall be deemed to be
the income of the tax year in which such
amount is so shared and shall
accordingly be chargeable to income-tax.

28.

(b) where any amount standing to
the credit of the Fund and not charged
to income-tax during any tax year is
shared, either wholly or in part, with a
recognised stock exchange, the whole
of the amount so shared shall be
deemed to be the income of the tax year
in which such amount is so shared and
shall accordingly be chargeable to
income-tax.

506

A
29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

B

C

D

Any income, by way
Any
Investor
(a) Such fund is notified by the
of
contributions Protection Fund set Central Government; and
received
from
a up as per the
(b) where any amount standing to
regulations by a the credit of the Fund and not charged to
depository.
depository.
income-tax during any tax year is
shared, either wholly or in part with a
depository, the whole of the amount so
shared shall be deemed to be the income
of the tax year in which such amount is
so shared and shall, accordingly, be
chargeable to income-tax.
(a) Any income by
(a) Such fund is notified by the
Any
Core
way of contribution Settlement
Central Government; and
received from specified
Guarantee Fund,
(b) where any amount standing to the
persons;
set up by a credit of the Fund and not charged to
(b) any income by
recognised clearing income-tax during any tax year is
way
of
penalties
corporation.
shared, either wholly or in part with the
imposed
by
the
specified person, the whole of the
recognised
clearing
amount so shared shall be deemed to be
corporation and credited
the income of the tax year in which such
to the Core Settlement
amount is so shared and shall,
Guarantee Fund.
accordingly, be chargeable to income(c) any income from
tax.
investment made by the
Fund.
Any
income
(a) A registered
chargeable under the union within the
heads “Income from
house property” and meaning of the
Unions
“Income from other Trade
sources”.
Act, 1926 (16 of
1926),
formed
primarily for the
purpose
of
regulating
the
relations between
workmen
and
employers
or
between workmen
and workmen; or
(b) an association
of registered unions
referred to in clause
(a).
Any interest on
Such securities are held by, or are the
Provident Fund
securities, and any to
which
the property of such Provident Fund.
capital gains of the fund
Funds
arising from the sale, Provident
1925
exchange or transfer of Act,
such securities.
(19 of 1925) applies.
Any income of the
(a) Such international sporting event—
Any
person
nature and to the extent, notified by the
(i)
is
approved
by
the
arising
from
the
international
body
regulating
the
Central
international sporting
international sport relating to such
Government.
event held in India.
event;

507

A

B

C

D
(ii) has participation by more than
two countries; and
(iii) is notified by the Central
Government for the purposes of this
clause; and
(b) nature and extent of such income
is notified by the Central Government.

34.

35.

36.

Any income, of the
A
body
or
nature and to the extent, authority which has
which
the
Central been established or
Government may notify constituted
or
in this behalf.
appointed under a
treaty
or
an
agreement entered
into by the Central
Government
with
two
or
more
countries
or
a
convention signed by
the
Central
Government.

Such body or authority—
(a) is established or constituted or
appointed not for the purposes of
profit; and
(b) is notified by the Central
Government.

Any amount received
Any individual.
Nil.
as a loan, either in lump
sum or in instalment, in
a transaction of reverse
mortgage referred to in
section 70(1)(zh)
Any income of the
A
body
or
Such body or authority or Board or
nature and to the extent authority or Board or Trust or Commission—
which the Central Trust or Commission
(a) has been established or
Government may, by (by whatever name
constituted by or under a Central Act,
notification, specify in called), or a class
State or Provincial Act, or
thereof, other than
this behalf.
constituted
by
the
Central
those covered under
Government or a State Government,
Schedule VII (Table:
with the object of regulating or
Sl. No. 42)
administering any activity for the
benefit of the general public;
(b) is not engaged in any
commercial activity; and
(c) is notified by the Central
Government.

37.

Any income accruing
Indian Strategic
It shall not apply to an arrangement,
or arising as a result of Petroleum Reserves if the crude oil is not replenished in the
arrangement
for Limited, being a storage facility within three years from
replenishment of crude wholly
owned the end of the tax year in which the
oil stored in its storage subsidiary of the Oil crude oil was removed from the storage
facility in pursuance of Industry
facility for the first time.
the directions of the Development Board
Central Government in under the Ministry of
this behalf.
Petroleum
and
Natural Gas.

508

A

B

C

38.

Any
widow,
Any
gratuity
or
computed as per the children
dependants
on
death
provisions of section
19(1)(Table: Sl. No. of an employee.
3.C) to (Table: Sl. No.
6.C)

39.

Any income falling
under section 10(15)(iic)
or (15)(iv)(i) or (19A) or
(40) of the Income-tax
Act, 1961(43 of 1961),
shall be subject to the
conditions as provided
therein.

D

Note 1: For the purposes of Sl. No. 3,––
“disaster” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2(d)
of the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
Note 2: For the purposes of Sl. No. 8 and 15,––
“family” in relation to an individual, means—
(i) the spouse and children of the individual; and
(ii) the parents, brothers and sisters of the individual or any of
them, wholly or mainly dependent on the individual.
Note 3: For the purposes of Sl. No. 18,––
“compensation or consideration” includes the compensation or
consideration enhanced or further enhanced by any court, Tribunal or other
authority.
Note 4: For the purposes of Sl. No. 20,––
“Sikkimese” means—
(i) an individual, whose name is recorded in the register
maintained under the Sikkim Subjects Regulation, 1961 read with the
Sikkim Subject Rules, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the “Register of
Sikkim Subjects”), immediately before the 26th April, 1975; or
(ii) an individual, whose name is included in the Register of
Sikkim Subjects by virtue of the Government of India Order No.
26030/36/90-I.C.I., dated the 7th August, 1990 and Order of even number
dated the 8th April, 1991; or
(iii) any other individual, whose name does not appear in the Register
of Sikkim Subjects, but it is established beyond doubt that the name of the
father or husband or paternal grand-father or brother from the same father
of such individual has been recorded in that register; or
(iv) any other individual, whose name does not appear in the Register
of Sikkim Subjects but it is established that such individual was domiciled
in Sikkim on or before the 26th April, 1975; or
(v) any other individual, who was not domiciled in Sikkim on or
before the 26th April, 1975, but it is established beyond doubt that the
father or husband or paternal grand-father or brother from the same father
of such individual was domiciled in Sikkim on or before the 26th April,
1975.

509

Note 5: For the purposes of Sl. No. 21,––
“concerned Board” means—
(i) in relation to tea, the Tea Board shall mean the Tea Board
established under section 4 of the Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953);
(ii) in relation to rubber, the Rubber Board constituted under
section 4 of the Rubber Act, 1947 (24 of 1947);
(iii) in relation to coffee, the Coffee Board constituted under
section 4 of the Coffee Act, 1942 (7 of 1942);
(iv) in relation to cardamom, the Spices Board constituted under
section 3 of the Spices Board Act, 1986 (10 of 1986);
(v) in relation to any other commodity, any Board or other
authority established under any law for the time being in force which
the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
Note 6: For the purposes of Sl. No. 22,––
“local authority” means—
(i) Panchayat as referred to in article 243(d) of the Constitution; or
(ii) Municipality as referred to in article 243P(e) of the
Constitution; or
(iii) Municipal Committee and District Board,
legally entitled to, or entrusted by the Government with, the control or
management of a Municipal or local fund; or
(iv) Cantonment Board constituted under section 12 of the
Cantonments Act, 2006 (4 of 2006).
Note 7: For the purposes of Sl. No. 25,––
(a) “Khadi and Village Industries Commission” means the Khadi and
Village Industries Commission established under the Khadi and Village
Industries Commission Act, 1956 (91 of 1956); and
(b) “khadi” and “village industries” shall have the same meanings as
respectively assigned to them in that Act.
Note 8: For the purposes of Sl. No. 26,––
(a) “securitisation” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it,—
(i) in regulation 2(1)(r) of the Securities and Exchange Board of
India (Public Offer and Listing of Securitised Debt Instruments)
Regulations, 2008 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of
India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) and the Securities Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1956 (42 of 1956); or
(ii) in section 2(1)(z) of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of
2002; or
(iii) under the guidelines on securitisation of standard assets
issued by the Reserve Bank of India;
(b) “securitisation trust” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
221 (6)(d).
Note 9: For the purposes of Sl. No. 28,––
“commodity exchange” shall mean a registered association as defined
in section 2(jj) of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (74 of 1952).

510

Note10: For the purposes of Sl. No. 29,––
(a)“depository” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section
2(1)(e) of the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996);
(b)“regulations” shall mean the regulations made under the Securities
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) and the Depositories
Act, 1996.
Note11: For the purposes of Sl. No. 30––
(a) “recognised clearing corporation" shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in––
(i) regulation 2(1)(o) of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) (Stock
Exchanges and Clearing Corporations) Regulations, 2012 made under the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956); or
(ii) regulation 2(1)(n) of the International Financial Services Centres
Authority (Market Infrastructure Institutions) Regulations, 2021 made under
the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 (50 of 2019);
(b) “regulations” means––
(i) the Securities Contracts (Regulation) (Stock Exchanges and
Clearing Corporations) Regulations, 2012 made under the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956); or
(ii) the International Financial Services Centres Authority (Market
Infrastructure Institutions) Regulations, 2021 made under the International
Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 (50 of 2019);
(c) “specified person” means—
(i) any recognised clearing corporation which establishes and
maintains the Core Settlement Guarantee Fund;
(ii) any recognised stock exchange, being a shareholder in such
recognised clearing corporation, or a contributor to the Core Settlement
Guarantee Fund; and
(iii) any clearing member contributing to the Core Settlement
Guarantee Fund.

511

SCHEDULE IV
(See section 11)
INCOME NOT TO BE INCLUDED IN TOTAL INCOME OF ELIGIBLE NON-RESIDENTS, FOREIGN COMPANIES AND
OTHER SUCH PERSONS

In computing the total income of a tax year of any eligible person mentioned in column C of
the Table below, the income mentioned in column B of the said Table shall not be included, subject
to the conditions mentioned in column D of the said Table, and the expressions used in columns B
to D shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Notes below the said Table.
Table
Sl.
No.

Income not to be
included in total income

Eligible persons

Conditions

A

B

C

D

1.

Any income by way of
(a) A person being
Such interest is on moneys standing
interest.
an individual, who is a to the credit of such person in a Nonresident outside India Resident (External) Account in any
as defined in section bank in India as per the said Act and
2(w) of the Foreign the rules made thereunder.
Exchange
Management
Act,
1999 (42 of 1999); or
(b) a person being
an individual who has
been permitted by the
Reserve Bank of India
to maintain the said
account.

2.

(a) The remuneration received as a
Any
remuneration
An official, by
received for service in the whatever name called, trade commissioner or other official
capacity as an official of an embassy, high representative in India of the
mentioned in column C, commission, legation, government of a foreign State (not
holding office as such in an honorary
not being a citizen of commission,
capacity), or as members of the staff,
India.
consulate or the trade if any, of the government, resident for
representation of a similar purposes in the country
foreign State, or as a concerned enjoy a similar exemption
member of the staff of in that country; and
any of these officials.
(b) the members of the staff are
subjects of the country represented and
are not engaged in any business or
profession or employment in India
otherwise than as members of such
staff.

3.

Any
remuneration
A person who is an
(a) The foreign enterprise is not
received as an employee employee of a foreign engaged in any trade or business in
for services rendered by enterprise, not being a India;
him during his stay in citizen of India.
(b) his stay in India does not exceed
India
in the aggregate a period of ninety
days in such tax year; and
(c) such remuneration is not liable
to be deducted from the income of the
employer chargeable under this Act.

511

512

A

B

C

D

4.

Any
income
Any
individual
The total stay of such individual in
chargeable under the being a non-resident, India does not exceed in the aggregate
head “Salaries”, received not being a citizen of a period of ninety days in the tax year.
or due as remuneration India.
for services rendered in
connection with his
employment on a foreign
ship.

5.

Any
remuneration
An employee of the
Such remuneration is received
received as an employee Government of a during his stay in India in connection
of the Government of a foreign State, not with his training in any establishment
being a citizen of or office of, or in any undertaking
foreign State.
India.
owned by—
(a) the Government; or
(b) any company in which the
entire paid-up share capital is held
by the Central Government or any
State Government or State
Governments, or partly by the
Central Government and partly by
one or more State Governments; or
(c) any company which is a
subsidiary of a company referred to
in clause (b); or
(d) any corporation established
by or under a Central Act or State
Act or Provincial Act; or
(e) any society registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860
(21 of 1860), or under any other law
and wholly financed by the Central
Government,
or
any
State
Government or State Governments,
or partly by the Central
Government and partly by one or
more State Governments.

6.

Any income arising by
Any
way of royalty or fees for company.
technical services.

foreign

(a) Such company is notified by the
Central Government; and
(b) such income is received in
pursuance of an agreement entered
into with the Central Government for
providing services in or outside India
in projects connected with security of
India.

513

A
7.

B

C

D

Any income arising by
A non-resident, not
(a) Such royalty is received from
way of royalty from, or being a company, or a the National Technical Research
fees
for
technical foreign company.
Organisation; or.
services rendered in or
(b) such fees is for technical
outside India.
services rendered to the National
Technical Research Organisation.

8.

Interest received.

9.

Income from lease
rentals, by whatever
name called, of a cruise
ship.

Such interest is on a deposit made
Non-resident or a
person who is not on or after the 1st April, 2005 in an
ordinarily resident in Offshore Banking Unit referred to in
section 2(u) of the Special Economic
India.
Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005).
Foreign company.

(a) Such income is received from a
specified company which operates
such ship or ships in India;
(b) such foreign company and the
specified company are subsidiaries of
the same holding company; and
(c) such income is received or
accrues or arises in India for any
relevant tax year beginning on or
before the 1st April, 2029.

10.

Any income derived in
The
European
Such investments made out of its
India by way of interest, Economic Community. funds under such scheme as the
dividends or Capital gains
Central Government may, by
from investments made.
notification specify.

11.

Any income received in
India in Indian currency.

A foreign company.

(a) Such income is on account of sale
of crude oil or any other goods or
rendering of services, as notified by the
Central Government in this behalf, to
any person in India;
(b) receipt of such income in India
by the foreign company is pursuant to
an agreement or an arrangement
entered into by the Central
Government or approved by the
Central Government;
(c) such agreement is entered with
the foreign company, having regard to
the national interest, and the
agreement or arrangement is notified
by the Central Government; and
(d) such foreign company is not
engaged in any activity in India, other
than activity resulting in such income.

12.

Any income accruing
or arising on account of
storage of crude oil in a
facility in India and sale
of such crude oil to any
person resident in India.

A foreign company.

(a) Such storage and sale by the
foreign company is pursuant to an
agreement or an arrangement entered
into by the Central Government or
approved by the Central Government;
and

514

A

B

C

D
(b) such agreement is entered with
the foreign company, having regard to
the national interest, and the
agreement or arrangement is notified
by the Central Government.

13.

Any income accruing
or arising to on account
of sale of leftover stock
of crude oil, if any, from
the facility in India after
the expiry of the
agreement
or
arrangement referred to
against serial number 12
or on termination of the
said
agreement
or
arrangement.

14.

Any income falling
under section 10(6A),
(6B), (6BB), (15A),
(15)(iiia),
(15)(iiib),(15)(iiic)
or
(15)(iv)(a), (15)(iv)(b)
or(15)(iv)(fa) of the
Income-tax Act, 1961(43
of 1961) subject to the
conditions as specified
therein.

A foreign company.

Such sale shall be as per the terms
mentioned in the said agreement,
subject to such conditions as notified
by the Central Government in this
behalf.

Note 1: For the purposes of Sl. No. 9,––
(a) “specified company” means any company, other than a domestic
company which operates cruise ships in India and opts to pay tax as per the
provisions of section 61(2)(Table: Sl. No. 2);
(b) “holding company”, in relation to a foreign company or a specified
company, means a company of which such companies are subsidiary
companies; and
(c) “subsidiary company” or “subsidiary”, in relation to a holding
company, means a company in which the holding company exercises or
controls more than one-half of the total share capital either at its own or
together with one or more of its subsidiary companies.
Note 2: For the purposes of Sl. No. 10,––
“European Economic Community” means the European Economic
Community established by the Treaty of Rome of 25th March, 1957.

515

SCHEDULE V
(See section 11)
INCOME NOT TO BE INCLUDED IN TOTAL INCOME OF CERTAIN ELIGIBLE PERSONS INCLUDING
INVESTMENT FUNDS, BUSINESS TRUSTS AND THEIR UNIT HOLDERS

In computing the total income of a tax year of any eligible person mentioned in column C
of the Table below, the income mentioned in column B of the said Table shall not be included,
subject to the conditions mentioned in column D of the said Table, and the expressions used in
columns B to D of the said Table shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in Notes
below the said table.
Table
Sl.
No.

A

Income not to be
included in total income

Eligible
persons

B

Conditions

C

D

1.

Any income other than
An
the income chargeable investment fund.
under the head “Profits and
gains of business or
profession”.

2.

Any income referred to
A unit holder
in section 224, accruing or of an investment
arising to, or received fund.
being that proportion of
income which is of the
same nature as income
chargeable under the head
“Profits and gains of
business or profession”.

3.

Any income by way
A
of—
trust.
(a) interest received or
receivable from a special
purpose vehicle; or
(b) dividend received or
receivable from a special
purpose vehicle.

4.

Any income by way
of renting or leasing or
letting out any real estate
asset owned directly by
such business trust.

A business
trust, being a
real
estate
investment trust.

5

Any
distributed
income referred to in
section 223

Any
unit
Exemption shall not be allowed on that
holder of a proportion of the income which is of the
business trust.
same nature as––

Nil.

business

(a) interest received or receivable
from a special purpose vehicle by the
business trust; or

515

516

A

B

C

D
(b) dividend received or receivable
from a special purpose vehicle by the
business trust (in a case where the special
purpose vehicle has exercised the option
under section 200; or
(c) income of a business trust by way
of renting or leasing or letting out any real
estate asset owned directly by such
business trust.

6.

Any income from
Venture
investment in a venture capital company
capital undertaking.
or
venture
capital
fund
other than being
an investment
fund specified in
section
224(10)(a).

7.

Any income of the
Any
nature of––
specified
person.
(a) dividend;
(b) interest;
(c) any sum referred
to in section 92(2)(k); or
(d) long-term capital
gains (whether or not
such capital gains are
deemed as short term
capital gains under
section 76),
arising
from
an
investment made by a
specified person in
India, whether in the
form of debt or share
capital or unit.

(a) Such investment—
(i) is made on
or after the
1st April, 2020 but on or before the
31st March, 2030;
(ii) is held for at least three years; and
(iii) is in,—
(A) a business trust;
(B) an eligible infrastructure
entity;
(C) an eligible Alternate Investment
Fund;
(D) an
company; or

eligible

(E) an eligible
Financial Company;

domestic
Non-banking

(b) The provisions of this clause shall be
governed by guidelines issued by the Board,
if any difficulty arises in interpreting or
implementing the provisions of this clause;
(c) such Guidelines shall be––
(i) issued with the previous approval of
the Central Government;
(ii) every Guideline issued by the
Board under this clause shall be laid
before each House of Parliament; and
(iii) shall be binding on the Income-tax
Authority and the specified person;

517

A

B

C

D
(d) where any income has not been
included in the total income of the
specified person, and subsequently
during any tax year the specified person
fails to satisfy any of these conditions so
that the said income would not have been
eligible for such non-inclusion, such
income shall be chargeable to income-tax
as the income of the specified person of
that tax year;
(e) where an eligible Alternate
Investment Fund has investment of less
than 100% in one or more of eligible
infrastructure entity or eligible domestic
company or eligible Non-Banking
Financial Company or in an eligible
InvIT, income accrued or arisen or
received or attributable to such
investment, directly or indirectly, which
is exempt shall be calculated
proportionately to that investment made
in one or more of the eligible
infrastructure entity or eligible domestic
company or eligible Non-Banking
Financial Company or in an eligible
InvIT, in such manner as prescribed;
(f) where an eligible domestic
company has investment of less than
100% in one or more of the eligible
infrastructure entity, income accrued or
arisen or received or attributable to such
investments, directly or indirectly, which
is exempt herein shall be calculated
proportionately to the investment made in
one or more of the eligible infrastructure
entity, in such manner, as prescribed;
(g) where an eligible Non-Banking
Financial Company has lending of less
than 100% in one or more of the eligible
infrastructure entity, income accrued or
arisen or received or attributable to such
lending, directly or indirectly, which is
exempt herein shall be calculated
proportionately to the lending made in
eligible infrastructure entity, in such
manner, as prescribed;
(h) in case a sovereign wealth fund or
pension fund has loans or borrowings,
directly or indirectly, for the purposes of
making investment in India, such fund
shall be deemed to be not eligible for
exclusion from total income.

518

A

B

C

8.

Any income falling
under section 10(23F) and
(23FA) of the Income-tax
Act, 1961 (43 of 1961),
subject to the conditions as
specified therein.

D

Note 1: For the purposes of Sl. Nos. 1 and 2,––
“investment fund” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 224(10)(a).
Note 2: For the purposes of Sl. No. 3,––
“special purpose vehicle” means an Indian company in which the business
trust holds controlling interest and any specific percentage of shareholding or
interest, as may be required by the law under which such trust is granted
registration.
Note 3: For the purposes of Sl. No. 4,––
“real estate asset” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in regulation
2(1)(zj) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Real Estate Investment
Trusts) Regulations, 2014 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India
Act, 1992 (15 of 1992).
Note 4: For the purposes of Sl. No. 6,––
(a) “venture capital company” means a company which—
(i) has been granted a certificate of registration, before the 21st
May, 2012, as a Venture Capital Fund and is regulated under the Securities
and Exchange Board of India (Venture Capital Funds) Regulations, 1996
(hereinafter referred to as the Venture Capital Funds Regulations) made
under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992); or
(ii) has been granted a certificate of registration as Venture Capital
Fund as a sub-category of Category I Alternative Investment Fund and is
regulated under the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Alternative
Investment Funds) Regulations, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as the
Alternative Investment Funds Regulations) made under the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), and which fulfils the
following conditions:—
(A) it is not listed on a recognised stock exchange;
(B) it has invested not less than two-thirds of its investible funds
in unlisted equity shares or equity linked instruments of venture capital
undertaking; and
(C) it has not invested in any venture capital undertaking in which
its director or a substantial shareholder (being a beneficial owner of
equity shares exceeding 10% of its equity share capital) holds, either
individually or collectively, equity shares in excess of 15% of the
paid-up equity share capital of such venture capital undertaking;
(b) “venture capital fund” means a fund—
(i) operating under a trust deed registered under the provisions of the
Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), which—

519

(A) has been granted a certificate of registration, before the 21st
May, 2012, as a Venture Capital Fund and is regulated under the
Venture Capital Funds Regulations; or
(B) has been granted a certificate of registration as Venture
Capital Fund as a sub-category of Category I Alternative Investment
Fund under the Alternative Investment Funds Regulations or as referred
to regulation 18(2) of the International Financial Services Centres
Authority (Fund Management) Regulations, 2022 made under the
International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 (50 of
2019), and which fulfils the following conditions:—
(I) it has invested not less than two-thirds of its investible
funds in unlisted equity shares or equity linked instruments of
venture capital undertaking;
(II) it has not invested in any venture capital undertaking in
which its trustee or the settler holds, either individually or
collectively, equity shares in excess of 15% of the paid-up equity
share capital of such venture capital undertaking; and
(III) the units, if any, issued by it are not listed in any
recognised stock exchange; or
(IV) any other condition as prescribed; or
(ii) operating as a venture capital scheme made by the Unit Trust of
India ;
(c) "venture capital undertaking" means—
(i) a venture capital undertaking as defined in clause (n) of
regulation 2 of the Venture Capital Funds Regulations; or
(ii) a venture capital undertaking as defined in clause (aa) of
regulation 2(1) of the Alternative Investment Funds Regulations.
Note 5: For the purposes of Sl. No. 7,––
(a) “specified person” means—
(i) a wholly owned subsidiary of the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority,
which—
(A) is a resident of the United Arab Emirates; and
(B) makes investment, directly or indirectly, out of the fund
owned by the Government of Abu Dhabi;
(ii) a sovereign wealth fund, which satisfies the following conditions,
namely:—
(A) it is wholly owned and controlled, directly or indirectly, by
the government of a foreign country;
(B) it is set up and regulated under the law of such foreign
country;
(C) the earnings of the said fund are credited either to the account
of the government of that foreign country or to any other account
designated by that government so that, no portion of the earnings inures
any benefit to any private person;
(D) the asset of the said fund vests in the government of such
foreign country upon dissolution;

520

(E) the provisions of items (C) and (D) shall not apply to any
payment made to creditors or depositors for loan taken or borrowing for
the purposes other than for making investment in India;
(F) it does not participate in the day-to-day operations of investee
but the monitoring mechanism to protect the investment with the
investee including the right to appoint directors or executive director
shall not be considered as participation in the day to day operations of
the investee; and
(G) it is specified by the Central Government, by notification for
this purpose and fulfils the conditions specified in such notification;
(iii) a pension fund, which—
(A) is created or established under the law of a foreign country
including the laws made by any of its political constituents, being a
province, State or local body, by whatever name called;
(B) is not liable to tax in such foreign country or if liable to tax,
exemption from taxation for all its income has been provided by such
foreign country;
(C) it does not participate in the day-to-day operations of investee
but the monitoring mechanism to protect the investment with the
investee including the right to appoint directors or executive director
shall not be considered as participation in day-to-day operations of the
investee;
(D) is specified by the Central Government, by notification for
this purpose and fulfils conditions specified in such notification; and
(E) satisfies such other conditions as prescribed;
(b) “investee” means a business trust or eligible infrastructure entity or
eligible Alternate Investment Fund or eligible domestic company or eligible
Non-Banking Financial Company, in which the sovereign wealth fund or the
pension fund has made the investment directly or indirectly as provided herein;
(c) “loan and borrowing” means—
(i) any loan taken, or borrowing by a sovereign wealth fund from, or
any deposit or investment made in a sovereign wealth fund by any person
other than the Government of the country in which the sovereign wealth fund
is set up;
(ii) any loan taken, or borrowing by a pension fund from, or any deposit
or investment made in a pension fund by any person, but shall not include––
(A) the deposit or investment which represents statutory
obligations and defined contributions of one or more funds or plans
established for providing retirement, social security, employment,
disability or death benefits; or
(B) any similar compensation to the participants or beneficiaries
of such funds or plans, as the case may be;
(d) “eligible infrastructure entity” means a company or enterprise or an entity
carrying on the business of––
(i) developing;
(ii) operating and maintaining; or

521

(iii) developing, operating and maintaining an infrastructure facility as
defined in section 138(11) or such other business as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf;
(e) “eligible Alternate Investment Fund” means Category-I or Category-II
Alternative Investment Fund––
(i) regulated under the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Alternative Investment Funds) Regulations, 2012 made under the Securities
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);
(ii) having not less than 50% investment in one or more of the eligible
infrastructure entity or eligible domestic company or eligible Non-Banking
Financial Company or in an eligible InvIT, computed in such manner as
prescribed;
(f) “eligible domestic company” means a domestic company––
(i) set up and registered on or after the 1st April, 2021; and
(ii) having minimum 75% investments in one or more of the eligible
infrastructure entities, computed in such manner, as prescribed;
(g) “eligible Non-Banking Financial Company” means––
(i) a non-banking financial company registered as an Infrastructure
Finance Company as referred to in notification number RBI/2009-10/316
issued by the Reserve Bank of India or in an Infrastructure Debt Fund or a
non-banking finance company as referred to in the Infrastructure Debt Fund
- Non-Banking Financial Companies (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2011,
issued by the Reserve Bank of India; and
(ii) having minimum 90% lending to one or more of eligible
infrastructure entities, computed in such manner, as prescribed; and
(h) “eligible InvIT” means an Infrastructure Investment Trust referred to in
section 2(21)(a).

522

SCHEDULE VI
(See section 11)
INCOME NOT TO BE INCLUDED IN TOTAL INCOME OF CERTAIN ELIGIBLE PERSONS IN INTERNATIONAL
FINANCIAL SERVICES CENTRE OR HAVING INCOME THEREFROM

In computing the total income of a tax year of any eligible person, as mentioned in
column C of the Table below, the income mentioned in column B of the said Table and the income
as mentioned in savings clause shall not be included, subject to the conditions mentioned in
column D of the said Table, and the expressions used in columns B to D of the said Table, shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Notes below the said Table.
Table
Sl.
No.

Income not to be
included in total income

Eligible
persons

Conditions

A

B

C

D

1.

Any income accrued
Any specified
(a) Consideration is paid or payable in
or arisen to, or received, fund.
convertible foreign exchange;
as a result of transfer of
(b) Income shall not be included in the
capital asset referred to in
total income to the extent such income is
section 70(1)(r) where
attributable to––
such transfer takes place
(i) units held by non-resident (not
on a recognised stock
exchange located in any
being the permanent establishment of a
International Financial
non-resident in India); or
Services Centre.
(ii) the investment division of
offshore banking unit; and
(c) The income exempt shall be
computed in such manner as prescribed.

2.

As specified in clauses (b) and (c) of
Any income accrued
Any specified
Column D against Sl. No. 1.
or arisen to, or received, fund.
as a result of transfer of
securities (other than
shares in a company
resident in India).

3.

Any income from
securities issued by a nonresident
where
such
securities are not issued
by
a
permanent
establishment of a nonresident in India.

(a) Such income otherwise does not
Any specified
accrue or arise in India;
fund.

Any income from a
securitisation trust, which
is chargeable under the
head “Profits and gains
of
business
or
profession”.

As specified in clauses (b) and (c) of
Any specified
Column D against Sl. No. 1.
fund.

4.

(b) As specified in clauses (b) and (c) of
Column D against Sl. No. 1.

522

523

A

B

C

D

5.

Any income accrued
or arisen to, or received as
a result of—

Non-resident.

(a) Such contract, instrument or
derivative is entered into with an offshore
banking unit of an International Financial
Services Centre or any Foreign Portfolio

(a) transfer of nondeliverable
forward
contracts or offshore
derivative instruments
or
over-the-counter
derivatives; or

Investor being a unit of an International
Financial Services Centre; and

(b) it fulfils such conditions, as prescribed.

(b) distribution of
income on offshore
derivative instruments.
6.

7.

Any income by way of
royalty or interest on
account of lease of an
aircraft or a ship in a tax
year.

Non-resident.

Any income received
from––

Non-resident.

(a) portfolio of
securities or financial
products or funds,
managed
or
administered by any
portfolio manager on
behalf of the nonresident; or

(a) Such royalty or interest is paid by a
unit of an International Financial Services
Centre; and
(b) such unit has commenced its
operations on or before the 31st March,
2030.
(a) Such income is received in an
account maintained with an Offshore
Banking Unit in any International
Financial Services Centre; and
(b) the income not to be included in the
total income shall be to the extent such
income accrues or arises outside India and
is not deemed to accrue or arise in India.

(b) such activity
carried out by such
person, as notified by
the
Central
Government.
8

Any income by way
of Capital gains arising
from the transfer of
equity
shares
of
domestic
company
where such domestic
company is a Unit of an
International Financial
Services Centre.

A
non(a) The domestic company—
resident, or a
(i) it is engaged primarily in the
Unit
of
an
business of leasing of aircraft or ship;
International
(ii) has commenced operations on or
Financial
before the 31st March, 2030; and
Services Centre,
engaged
(b) exclusion from total income shall
primarily in the
be available for capital gains arising from
business
of
the transfer of equity shares of such
leasing
of
domestic company in a tax year falling
aircraft or ship.
within—
(i) ten tax years beginning with
the tax year in which the domestic
company has commenced operations;
or

524

A

B

C

D
(ii) ten tax years beginning with the
tax year commencing on the 1st April,
2023, where the period referred to in
sub-clause (i) ends before the 1st April,
2033.

9.

Any income accruing
A unit holder
or arising to, or received of a specified
from a specified fund or fund.
on transfer of units in a
specified fund.

10.

Any income of the
Any
non(a) The Capital gain is on account of
nature of Capital gains, resident or a transfer of shares by the resultant fund or
arising or received on specified fund. a specified fund; and
account of transfer of
(b) such shares were transferred from
share of a company
the
original fund, or from its wholly
resident in India.
owned special purpose vehicle, to the
resultant fund in relocation, and the
Capital gains on such shares were not
chargeable to tax if that relocation had not
taken place; and
(c) income not to be included in the
total income shall be to the extent
attributable to units held by the nonresident (not being a permanent
establishment of a non-resident in India)
in such manner, as prescribed.

11.

Any income by way
A Unit of any
Such Unit is primarily engaged in
of dividends from a International
the business of leasing of aircraft or ship.
company being a Unit of Financial
an
International Services Centre.
Financial
Services
Centre
primarily
engaged in the business
of leasing of an aircraft
or ship.

12.

Any income by way of
Noninterest payable.
resident.

Such interest is payable by a Unit of
an International Financial Services Centre
in respect of monies borrowed by it on or
after the 1st September, 2019.

Note 1: For the purposes of Sl. Nos. 1 to 4,––
(a) “convertible foreign exchange” means foreign exchange which is for the
time being treated by the Reserve Bank of India as convertible foreign exchange
for the purposes of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 and the rules
made thereunder;
(b) “investment division of offshore banking unit” means an investment
division of a banking unit of a non-resident located in an International Financial
Services Centre and which has commenced its operations on or before the 31st
March, 2030;

525
(c) “manager” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in regulation
2(1)(q) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Alternative Investment
Funds) Regulations, 2012 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India
Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);
(d) “permanent establishment” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 173 (c);
(e) “securities” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2(h)
of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and shall also
include such other securities or instruments as notified by the Central Government
in this behalf;
(f) “securitisation trust” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 221
(6)(d);
(g) “specified fund” means—
(i) a fund established or incorporated in India in the form of a trust or a
company or a limited liability partnership or a body corporate,—
(A) which has been granted a certificate of registration as a
Category III Alternative Investment Fund and is regulated––
(I) under the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Alternative Investment Funds) Regulations, 2012 made under
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; or
(II) regulated under the International Financial Services
Centres Authority (Fund Management) Regulations, 2022 made
under the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act,
2019 (50 of 2019);
(B) which has been granted a certificate as a retail scheme or an
Exchange Traded Fund, and is regulated under the International
Financial Services Centres Authority (Fund Management) Regulations,
2022 made under the International Financial Services Centres
Authority Act, 2019 (50 of 2019), and satisfies such conditions, as
prescribed;
(C) which is located in any International Financial Services
Centre; and
(D) of which all the units are held by non-residents except––
(I) the unit held by a sponsor or manager;
(II) where any unit holder or holders, being non-resident
during the tax year when such unit or units were issued, becomes
resident under section 6(2) or (3) or (4) or (5) or (6) or (7) in any
tax year subsequent to that year;
(III) in case of sub-item (II), aggregate value and the number
of units held by such resident unit holder or holders do not exceed
5% of the total units issued and shall fulfil such other conditions
as prescribed; or
(ii) investment division of an offshore banking unit, which has been—
(A) granted a certificate of registration as a Category-I foreign
portfolio investor under the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Foreign Portfolio Investors) Regulations, 2019 made under the
Securities Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) and which
has commenced its operations on or before the 31st March, 2025; and

526

(B) fulfils such conditions including maintenance of separate
accounts for its investment division, as prescribed;
(h) “sponsor” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in regulation
2(1)(w) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Alternative Investment
Funds) Regulations, 2012 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India
Act, 1992;
(i) “trust” means a trust established under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or
under any other law;
(j) “unit” means beneficial interest of an investor in the fund and shall include
shares or partnership interests.
Note 2: For the purposes of Sl. No. 5,––
“Foreign Portfolio Investor” shall mean a person registered as per the
provisions of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Foreign Portfolio
Investors) Regulations, 2019 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of
India Act, 1992.
Note 3: For the purposes of Sl. Nos. 6, 8 and 11,––
(a) “aircraft” means an aircraft or a helicopter, or an engine of an aircraft or
a helicopter, or any part thereof;
(b) “ship” means a ship or an ocean vessel, engine of a ship or ocean vessel,
or any part thereof.
Note 4: For the purposes of Sl. No. 7,––
“portfolio manager” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
regulation 2(1)(z) of the International Financial Services Centres Authority
(Capital Market Intermediaries) Regulations, 2021 made under the International
Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019.
Note 5: For the purposes of Sl. No. 9,––
(a) “specified fund” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in Note
1(g);
(b) “unit” means beneficial interest of an investor in the fund and shall include
shares or partnership interests.
Note 6: For the purposes of Sl. No. 10,––
(a) “original fund”, “relocation” and “resultant fund” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in section 70(2);
(b) “specified fund” shall have the meaning assigned to it in Note 1(g).
Note 7: For the purposes of Sl. No. 12,––
“Unit” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2(zc) of the
Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.

527

SCHEDULE VII
(See section 11)
PERSONS EXEMPT FROM TAX
Persons not liable to pay tax on total income.––Any eligible person, mentioned in
column B of the Table below, shall not be liable to pay income-tax on the total income for any tax
year, subject to the conditions mentioned in column C of the said Table, and the expression used
in columns B and C of the said Table, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
the Notes below the said Table.

Table
Sl.
No.

Eligible persons

Conditions

A

B

C

1.

Any regimental Fund or Nonpublic Fund established by the armed
forces of the Union.

Such Fund is for the welfare of the past and
present members of the armed forces or their
dependants.

2.

Any fund established for such
purposes as may be notified by the
Board for the welfare of employees or
their dependants and such employees
are members of such fund.

(a) Such fund—
(i) applies its income or accumulates it for
application, wholly and exclusively to the
objects for which it is established; and
(ii) invests its funds and contributions and
other sums received by it in the forms or
modes specified in section 350;
(b) such fund is approved by the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner in such manner
as prescribed; and such approval shall at any one
time have effect for such tax year or years not
exceeding three tax years as specified in the
order of approval.

3.

4.

Any fund, by whatever name
called, set up by the Life Insurance
Corporation of India on or after the 1st
August, 1996 or any other insurer
under a pension scheme.

(a) The contribution is made to such pension
scheme by any person for the purpose of
receiving pension from such fund; and

An authority (whether known as
the Khadi and Village Industries
Board or by any other name).

Such authority is established in a State by or
under a State Act or Provincial Act for the
development of khadi or village industries in the
State.

(b) such scheme is approved by the Controller
of Insurance or the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority established under
section 3(1) of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999).

527

528

A

B

C

5.

Any body or authority (whether or not a
body corporate or corporation sole)
established, constituted or appointed by or
under any Central Act or State Act or
Provincial Act.

(a) Such body or authority provides for
the administration of any one or more of
public religious or charitable trusts or
endowments
(including
mosques,
temples, gurudwaras, wakfs, churches,
synagogues, agiaries or other places of
public religious worship) or societies for
religious
or
charitable
purposes,
registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or any other law;
and
(b) exclusion from total income as
provided herein shall not be available to
any trust, endowment or society referred
to therein.

6.

SAARC Fund for Regional Projects set up
by Colombo Declaration issued on the 21st
December, 1991 by the Heads of State or
Government of the Member Countries of South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
established on the 8th December, 1985 by the
Charter of the South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation.

7.

Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority established under section 3(1) of
the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999).

8.

Central
Electricity
Regulatory
Commission constituted under section 76(1)
of the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003).

9.

Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation
of India) established section 3(1) of the Prasar
Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India)
Act, 1990 (25 of 1990).

10.

The Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund
or the Prime Minister’s Citizen Assistance
and Relief in Emergency Situations Fund
(PM CARES FUND).

11.

The Prime Minister’s Fund (Promotion of
Folk Art).

12.

The Prime Minister’s Aid to Students
Fund.

13.

The National Foundation for Communal
Harmony.

14.

The Swachh Bharat Kosh, set up by the
Central Government.

15.

The Clean Ganga Fund set up by the
Central Government.

529

A

B

16.

The Chief Minister’s Relief Fund or the
Lieutenant Governor’s Relief Fund in respect
of any State or Union territory as referred to
in section 133(1)(a)(xv).

17.

Any University or other educational
institution wholly or substantially financed
by the Government.

C

(a) It exists solely for educational
purposes and not for purposes of profit;
and
(b) if the Government grant to such
University or other educational institution
exceeds such percentage of the total
receipts including any donations, as
prescribed, of such University or other
educational institution, it shall be
considered as being substantially financed
by the Government during the relevant tax
year.

18.

Any hospital or other institution wholly or
substantially financed by the Government.

19.

(a) Any University or other educational
institution;
(b) any hospital or other institution.

(a) It is for the reception and treatment
of persons suffering from illness or mental
defectiveness, or for the reception and
treatment
of
persons
during
convalescence or of persons requiring
medical attention or rehabilitation;
(b) it exists solely for philanthropic
purposes and not for profit; and
(c) if the Government grant to such
hospital or other institution exceeds such
percentage of the total receipts including
any donations, as prescribed, of such
hospital or other institution, it shall be
considered as being substantially financed
by the Government during the relevant tax
year.
(a) Such University or other
educational institution exists solely for
educational purposes and not for profit;
(b) such hospital or other institution is
for the reception and treatment of persons
suffering from illness or mental
defectiveness, or for the reception and
treatment
of
persons
during
convalescence or of persons requiring
medical attention or rehabilitation;
(c) such hospital or other institution
exists solely for philanthropic purposes
and not for profit; and
(d) the aggregate of annual receipts of
the person from such University or
Universities or educational institution or
institutions, as well as, from such hospital
or hospitals or institution or institutions,
does not exceed ₹ 5,00,00,000.

530

A

B

20.

A Mutual Fund registered under the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992 (15 of 1992) or regulations made
thereunder.

21.

Any Mutual Fund set up by a public sector
bank or a public financial institution or
authorised by the Reserve Bank of India.

22.

A recognised provident fund.

23.

An approved superannuation fund.

24.

An approved gratuity fund.

C

Such conditions
Government may,
specify.

as the Central
by notification,

25.

Deposit-linked Insurance Fund established
under section 3G of the Coal Mines Provident
Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
1948 (46 of 1948).

26.

Deposit-linked Insurance Fund established
under section 6C of the Employees’ Provident
Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
1952 (19 of 1952).

27.

Employees' State Insurance Fund set up
under the provisions of the Employees’ State
Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948).

28.

An agricultural produce market committee
or board constituted under any law.

Such committee or board is constituted
for the purpose of regulating the
marketing of agricultural produce.

29.

A corporation established by a Central Act
or State Act or Provincial Act or of any other
body, institution or association (being a body,
institution or association wholly financed by
the Government).

Such corporation or other body or
institution or association has been
established or formed for promoting the
interests of the members of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or
backward classes, or of any two, or all of
them.

30.

A corporation established by the Central
Government or any State Government for
promoting the interests of the members of a
minority community.

31.

Any corporation established by a Central
Act or State Act or Provincial Act for the
welfare and economic upliftment of
ex-servicemen being the citizens of India.

32.

Any co-operative society formed for
promoting the interests of the members of
either the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled
Tribes, or both.

33.

Coffee
Board
constituted
under
section 4 of the Coffee Act, 1942 (7 of 1942).

Membership of such co-operative
society shall consist of only other
cooperative societies formed for similar
purposes and the finances of the society
are provided by the Government and such
other societies.

531

A

B

34.

Rubber Board constituted under section 4(1) of
the Rubber Board Act, 1947 (24 of 1947).

35.

Tea Board established under section 4 of the
Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953).

36.

Tobacco Board constituted under the Tobacco
Board Act, 1975 (4 of 1975).

37.

Marine Products Export Development Authority
established under section 4 of the Marine Products
Export Development Authority Act, 1972
(13 of 1972).

38.

Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export
Development Authority established under section 4
of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products
Export Development Act, 1985 (2 of 1986).

39.

Spices Board constituted under section 3(1) of the
Spices Board Act, 1986 (10 of 1986).

40.

Coir Board established under section 4 of the
Coir Industry Act, 1953 (45 of 1953).

41.

New Pension System Trust established on the
27th February, 2008 under the provisions of the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882).

42.

Any body or authority or Board or Trust or
Such body or authority or Board or
Commission, not being a company, which has been Trust or Commission is notified by the
established or constituted by or under a Central Act Central Government.
or State Act with one or more of the following
purposes,—
(a) dealing with and satisfying the need for
housing accommodation;
(b) planning, development or improvement of
cities, towns and villages;
(c) regulating, or regulating and developing,
any activity for the benefit of the general public;
or
(d) regulating any matter, for the benefit of the
general public, arising out of the object for which
it has been created.

43.

National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company
Limited, being a company established and wholly
financed by the Central Government for the
purposes of operating credit guarantee funds
established and wholly financed by the Central
Government.

44.

A credit guarantee fund established and wholly
financed by the Central Government and managed
by the National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company
Limited.

C

532

A

B

45.

Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small
Enterprises, being a trust created by the Central
Government and the Small Industries Development
Bank of India established under section 3(1) of the
Small Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989
(39 of 1989).

46.

An infrastructure debt fund.

C

Such fund is set up as per the
guidelines issued by the Central
Government, by notification.

47.

An institution established for financing the
Such exclusion from total income is
infrastructure and development set up under an Act ten consecutive tax years, beginning
from the tax year in which such
of Parliament.
institution is set up and such institution
is notified by the Central Government.

48.

A developmental financing institution, licensed
(a) Such institution is notified by
by the Reserve Bank of India under an Act of the Central Government;
Parliament referred to against serial number 47.
(b) exclusion of such income from
the total income is for five consecutive
tax years beginning from the tax year
in which the developmental financing
institution is set up; and
(c) the Central Government may,
by notification extend the period of
exclusion for a further period, not
exceeding five more consecutive tax
years, subject to fulfilment of such
conditions as specified in the said
notification.
Note 1: For the purposes of Sl. No 3,––
“Controller of Insurance” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in section 2(5B) of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938).
Note 2: For the purposes of Sl. No 4,––
“khadi” and “village industries” shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 1956
(61 of 1956).
Note 3: For the purposes of Sl. No 21,––
“public financial institution” shall have the same meaning as assigned
to it in section 2(72) of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).
Note 4: For the purposes of Sl. No 29,––
(a) Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in article 366(24) or (25) of the Constitution;
(b) “backward classes” means such classes of citizens, other than the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as notified by the Central
Government or any State Government.
Note 5: For the purposes of Sl. No 30,––
“minority community” means a community notified as such by the Central
Government.

533

Note 6: For the purposes of Sl. No 31,––
“ex-servicemen” means persons––
(i) who have served in any rank, whether as combatant or noncombatant;
(ii) in the armed forces of the Union or armed forces of the Indian States
before the commencement of the Constitution (but excluding the Assam
Rifles, Defence Security Corps, General Reserve Engineering Force, Lok
Sahayak Sena, Jammu and Kashmir Militia and Territorial Army);
(iii) for a continuous period of not less than six months after attestation;
(iv) have been released, otherwise than by way of dismissal or discharge
on account of misconduct or inefficiency; and
(v) includes their wife, children, father, mother, minor brother, widowed
daughter and widowed sister, wholly dependant upon such ex-servicemen,
immediately before their death or incapacitation, in case of deceased or
incapacitated ex-servicemen.

534

SCHEDULE VIII
[See section 12]
INCOME NOT TO BE INCLUDED IN THE TOTAL INCOME OF POLITICAL PARTIES AND ELECTORAL
TRUSTS

In computing the total income of a tax year of any eligible person, being a political party
or an electoral trust, as mentioned in column C of the Table below, the income mentioned in
column B of the said Table shall not be included, subject to the conditions mentioned in
column D of the said Table, and the expressions used in columns B to D of the said Table, shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Note below the said Table:
Table
Sl.
Income not to
Eligible
Conditions
No. be included in
persons
total income
A
1.

B

C

D

(a) Such political party keeps and maintains such
Any income
A
which
is political party books of account and other documents as would
enable the Assessing Officer to properly deduce its
chargeable under registered
the
head under section income therefrom;
“Income from 29(a) of the
(b) in respect of each such voluntary contribution
house property” Representation other than contribution by way of electoral bond in
or “Income from of the People excess of ₹ 20,000, such political party keeps and
other sources” or Act,
1951 maintains a record of such contribution and the
name and address of the person who has made such
“Capital gains” (43 of 1951)
contribution;
or any income by
way of voluntary
(c) the accounts of such political party are audited
by an accountant;
contributions
received from
(d) no donation exceeding ₹ 2,000 is received by
any person.
such political party otherwise than by an account
payee cheque drawn on a bank or an account payee
bank draft or use of electronic clearing system
through a bank account or through such other
electronic mode as prescribed or through electoral
bond;
(e) the treasurer of such political party or any
other person authorised by that political party in
this behalf submits a report under
section
29C (3) of the Representation of the People Act,
1951 (43 of 1951) for such tax year; and
(f) such political party furnishes a return of
income for the tax year as per the provisions of
section 263(1)(a)(iii) on or before the due date under
that section.

2.

Any
voluntary
contributions
received.

An electoral
trust.

(a) Such electoral trust distributes to any
political party, registered under section 29A of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of
1951), during the said tax year, 95% of the
aggregate donations received by it during the said
tax year along with the surplus, if any, brought
forward from any earlier tax year; and
(b) such electoral trust functions as per the
rules made by the Central Government.
Note: For the purposes of this Schedule, “electoral bond" means a bond referred to in the
Explanation to sub-section (3) of section 31 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934).
534

535

SCHEDULE IX
.

(See section 48)
DEDUCTION FOR TEA DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNT, COFFEE DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNT AND
RUBBER DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNT FOR COMPUTING INCOME UNDER THE HEAD “PROFITS
AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION”
1. Quantum of deduction.—(1) An assessee shall be allowed deduction of,––
(a) the amount or aggregate of the amounts deposited by the assessee in
the account as specified in paragraph 2; or
(b) 40 % of the profits of such business computed under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession” before making any deduction under this
paragraph,
whichever is less.
(2) The deduction shall be allowed before allowing set off of loss, if any,
brought forward from earlier tax years as per section 110.
2. Conditions for claiming deduction.—(1) The deduction under paragraph 1
shall be allowed if the assessee––
(a) is carrying on the business of growing and manufacturing tea or
coffee or rubber in India during the tax year; and
(b) has deposited any amount in the specified account being,—
(i) a special account maintained with the National Bank in
accordance with, and for the purposes specified in the special
scheme; or
(ii) a deposit account in accordance with, and for the purposes
specified in the deposit scheme;
(c) gets the accounts of such business for the relevant tax year audited
by an accountant before the specified date referred to in section 63 and
furnishes the audit report, in such form and manner as prescribed and
verified by such accountant, by that date.
(2) Where the assessee is required, by or under any other law, to get his
accounts audited, then it shall be sufficient compliance of sub-paragraph (1)(c), if
such person—
(a) gets the accounts of such business audited under such law before the
specified date referred to in section 63; and
(b) furnishes by that date the report of such audit along with report by an
accountant in the form referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(c).
(3) If any deduction has been allowed under paragraph 1 in any tax year, no
deduction shall be allowed in respect of such amount in any other tax year.
(4) Where the assessee referred to in paragraph 1 is a firm or an association of
persons or body of individuals, deduction under paragraph 1 shall not be allowed in
computing the income of any of the partners or members of such assessee.
3. Withdrawal from special account or deposit account.—(1) Any amount
standing to the credit of the assessee in the specified account shall not be allowed
to be withdrawn except for the purpose specified in the special scheme or, in the
deposit scheme, or in the circumstances specified below:—

535

536

(a) closure of business; or
(b) death of an assessee; or
(c) partition of a Hindu undivided family; or
(d) dissolution of a firm; or
(e) liquidation of a company.
(2) If any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the specified account,
is withdrawn during any tax year by the assessee in the circumstance referred to in
sub-paragraph (1)(a) and (1)(d), the whole of such amount shall be deemed to be
the profits and gains of business or profession of that tax year and shall accordingly
be charged to income-tax for that tax year, as if the business had not been closed or,
the firm had not been dissolved respectively.
(3) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-paragraph (1), if ––
(a) any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the specified
account is released by the National Bank or withdrawn by the assessee from
the Deposit account, during any tax year; and
(b) such amount is utilised for the purchase of specified articles or thing,
then whole of such amount so utilised shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of
business of that tax year and shall accordingly be charged to income-tax for that
tax year.
(4) If any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the specified account
which is––
(a) released by the National Bank; or
(b) withdrawn by the assessee from the deposit account,
during any tax year for utilisation for the purposes of such business as per the special
scheme or deposit scheme and the same is not so utilised, either wholly or partly,
within that tax year, such amount not so utilised shall be deemed to be the profits
and gains of business of that tax year and shall accordingly be charged to
income-tax for that tax year.
(5) The provisions of sub-paragraph (4) shall not apply in cases where amount
is released during any tax year on closure of the account in circumstances referred
to in sub-paragraph (1)(b), (1)(c) and (1)(e).
(6) In sub-paragraph (3), “specified article or thing” means—
(a) any machinery or plant to be installed in any office premises or
residential accommodation, including any accommodation in the nature of a
guest-house;
(b) any office appliances (not being computers);
(c) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of which is
allowed as a deduction (whether by way of depreciation or otherwise) in
computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” of any one tax year;
(d) any new machinery or plant to be installed in an industrial
undertaking for the purposes of business of construction, manufacture or
production of any article or thing specified in the list in Schedule XIII.
4. No deduction of expenditure met through the amount withdrawn from
specified account.—If the amount standing to the credit of the assessee in specified
account is utilised to incur any expenditure for the purpose of such business as per
the special scheme or deposit scheme, no deduction against such expenditure shall
be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains
of business or profession”.

537

5. Sale or transfer of asset acquired as per special scheme or deposit scheme.—
(1) Any asset,––
(a) which is acquired in accordance with the special scheme or the
deposit scheme; and
(b) is sold or transferred to any person in the tax year at any time before
expiry of eight years from the end of tax year in which such asset was acquired,
then, the part of cost of asset which is relatable to the deduction allowed under
paragraph 1 shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business of the tax year
in which such asset is sold or transferred and shall accordingly be charged to
income-tax for that tax year.
(2) The provisions of sub-paragraph (1) shall not apply, if the asset is sold or
transferred—
(a) by the assessee to the specified person; or
(b) by a firm to a company in view of succession of business or profession
of the firm by such company subject to the following conditions:––
(i) the provisions of specified scheme or deposit scheme is
applicable to the company in the same manner as it applied to the firm;
(ii) all the properties of the firm relating to the business or
profession immediately before the succession become the properties of
the company;
(iii) all the liabilities of the firm relating to the business or
profession immediately before the succession become the liabilities of
the company; and
(iv) all the shareholders of the company were partners of the firm
immediately before the succession.
(3) In this paragraph, “specified person” means,––
(a) Government; or
(b) a local authority; or
(c) a corporation established by or under a Central, State or Provincial
Act; or
(d) a Government company as defined in section 2(45) of the Companies
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).
6. Interpretation.—In this Schedule,—
(a) “Coffee Board” means the Coffee Board constituted under section 4
of the Coffee Act, 1942 (7 of 1942);
(b) “deposit account” means an account opened by the assessee for
making deposits by the assessee in accordance with and for the purposes
specified in the deposit scheme;
(c) “deposit scheme” means the scheme made by the Tea Board or the
Coffee Board or the Rubber Board, with the prior approval of the Central
Government;
(d) “National Bank” means the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development established under section 3 of the National Bank for Agriculture
and Rural Development Act, 1981 (61 of 1981);
(e) “Rubber Board” means the Rubber Board constituted under
section 4(1) of the Rubber Act, 1947 (34 of 1947);

538
(f) “Special account” means an account maintained by the assessee with
the National Bank for making deposits in accordance with and for the purposes
specified in the special scheme;
(g) “specified account” means a special account or a deposit account;
(h) “Tea Board” means the Tea Board established under section 4 of the
Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953).

539

SCHEDULE-X
(See section 49)
DEDUCTION FOR SITE RESTORATION FUND FOR COMPUTING INCOME UNDER THE HEAD
“PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION

1. Quantum of deduction.—(1) An assessee shall be allowed deduction of,––
(a) the amount or aggregate of the amount deposited by the assessee in
the account maintained with the State Bank of India as specified in
paragraph 2; or
(b) 20% of the profits of such business computed under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession” before making any deduction under this
paragraph,
whichever is less.
(2) The deduction shall be allowed before allowing set off of loss, if any,
brought forward from earlier tax years as per section 112.
(3) Any interest credited in the specified account shall be deemed to be a
deposit.
2. Conditions for claiming deduction.—(1) Deduction under paragraph 1 shall
be allowed if the assessee––
(a) is, during the tax year, carrying on the business consisting of the
prospecting for, or extraction or production of, petroleum or natural gas, or
both in India, and has entered into an agreement with the Central Government
for such business;
(b) has, before the end of the tax year, deposited any amount in the
specified account, being,––
(i) a special account in accordance with, and for the purposes
specified in the special scheme; or
(ii) a site restoration account in accordance with, and for the
purposes specified in the deposit scheme; and
(c) gets the accounts of such business for the relevant tax year audited
by an accountant before the specified date referred to in section 63 and
furnishes the audit report, in such form and manner, as prescribed and
verified by such accountant, by that date.
(2) Where the assessee is required, by or under any other law, to get his
accounts audited, then it shall be sufficient compliance of sub -paragraph
(1)(c), if such person—
(a) gets the accounts of such business audited under such law before the
specified date referred to in section 63; and
(b) furnishes by that date the report of such audit along with report by an
accountant in such form referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(c).
(3) If any deduction has been allowed under paragraph 1 in any tax year, no
deduction shall be allowed in respect of such amount in any other tax year.
(4) Where the asseessee referred to in paragraph 1 is a firm or an association
of persons or body of individuals, deduction under paragraph 1 shall not be allowed
in computing the income of any of the partners or members of such assessee.
3. Withdrawal from specified account.—(1) Any amount standing to the credit
of the assessee in the specified account shall not be allowed to be withdrawn except
for the purposes specified in the special scheme or in the deposit scheme.
539

540

(2)(a) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-paragraph (1), if––
(i) any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the specified
account is released or withdrawn from the special account or the site
restoration account, during any tax year; and
(ii) the amount is utilised for the purchase of specified articles or things,
then, whole of such amount so utilised shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of
business of that tax year and shall accordingly be charged to income-tax for that tax year;
(b) for the purposes of this paragraph, “specified article or thing” means—
(i) any machinery or plant to be installed in any office premises or
residential accommodation, including any accommodation in the nature of a
guest-house;
(ii) any office appliances (except computers);
(iii) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of which is
allowed as a deduction (whether by way of depreciation or otherwise) in
computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” of any one tax year;
(iv) any new machinery or plant for constructing or manufacturing or
producing any items listed in the Schedule XIII.
(3) Where any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in specified
account is withdrawn on closure of such account in any tax year, then the amount
computed as under shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business or
profession for the tax year and accordingly the following sum shall be charged to
income-tax for that tax year:
A = B-C
where,—
A = deemed profits and gains of business or profession of that tax year;
B = amount withdrawn from the specified account on its closure; and
C = amount, if any, payable to the Central Government by way of profit or
production share as provided in agreement referred to in section 54.
(4) Where any amount is withdrawn on closure of specified account in a tax
year in which the business of the assessee is no longer in existence, sub-paragraph
(3) shall apply as if the business is in existence in that tax year.
(5) If any amount standing to the credited of the assessee in the specified
account which is—
(a) released by the State Bank of India; or
(b) withdrawn by the assessee from the site restoration account,
during any tax year for utilisation for the purposes of such business as per the special
scheme or deposit scheme and the same is not so utilised, either wholly or in part,
shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business of that tax year and
accordingly be charged to income-tax for that tax year.
4. No deduction of expenditure met through amount withdrawn from specified
account.—(1) If the amount standing credit to the assessee in the specified account
is utilised to incur any expenditure for the purpose of business as per the special
scheme or deposit scheme, no deduction against such expenditure shall be allowed
in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business
or profession”.
(2) In this paragraph, “amount standing credit to the assessee in the specified
account” includes interest to such accounts.

541

5. Sale or transfer of asset acquired as per special scheme or deposit scheme.—
(1) Any asset,––
(a) which is acquired as per the special scheme or the deposit scheme;
and
(b) sold or transferred to any person in the tax year at any time before
the expiry of eight years from the end of tax year in which it was acquired,
then, the part of cost of asset as is relatable to the deduction allowed under paragraph 1
shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business of the tax year in which such asset
is sold or transferred and shall accordingly be charged to income-tax for that tax year.
(2) Sub-paragraph (1) shall not apply, if the asset is sold or transferred by—
(a) the assessee to the specified person; or
(b) a firm to a company in view of succession of business or profession
of the firm by such company subject to the following conditions:––
(i) the provisions of special scheme or deposit scheme is applicable
to the company in the same manner as it applied to the firm;
(ii) all the properties of the firm relating to the business or
profession immediately before the succession becomes the properties of
the company;
(iii) all the liabilities of the firm relating to the business or
profession immediately before the succession becomes the liabilities of
the company; and
(iv) all the shareholders of the company were partners of the firm
immediately before the succession.
(3) In this paragraph, “specified person” means—
(a) Government; or
(b) a local authority; or
(c) a corporation established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act; or
(d) a Government company as defined in section 2(45) of the Companies
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).
6. Interpretation.—For the purposes of this Schedule,—
(a) “amount standing to the credit of the assessee” pertaining to the
specified account includes interest accrued to such accounts;
(b) “deposit scheme” means a scheme made in this behalf by the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas;
(c) “specified account” means a special account or site restoration account;
(d) “special account” means an account maintained with the State Bank
of India for making deposits in accordance with, and for the purposes specified
in the special scheme;
(e) “special scheme” means a scheme approved in this behalf by the
Government of India in the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas;
(f) “site restoration account” means an account opened by the assessee
for making deposits in accordance with, and for the purposes specified in the
deposit scheme;
(g) “State Bank of India” means the State Bank of India constituted
under the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955).

542

SCHEDULE XI
[See section 2(91)]
PART A
RECOGNISED PROVIDENT FUNDS
1. Application of Part.— This Part shall not apply to any provident fund to
which the Provident Funds Act, 1925(19 of 1925), applies.
2. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “approving authority” means the Principal Chief Commissioner or
Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner;
(b) “employer” means any person who maintains a provident fund for
the benefit of his or its employees, being—
(i) a Hindu undivided family, company, firm or other association
of persons, or
(ii) an individual engaged in a business or profession, the profits
and gains whereof are assessable to income-tax under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession”;
(c) “employee” means an employee participating in a provident fund,
excluding personal or domestic servant;
(d) “contribution” means any sum credited by or on behalf of any
employee from his salary, or by an employer from his own funds, to the
individual account of an employee, excluding any sum credited as interest;
(e) “balance to the credit of an employee” means the total amount to the
credit of his individual account in a provident fund at any time;
(f) “annual accretion”, in relation to the balance to the credit of an
employee means the yearly increase to such balance, from contributions
and interest;
(g) “accumulated balance due to an employee” means the balance to his
credit, or portion thereof claimable by the employee under the regulations of the
fund, on the day he ceases to be an employee of the employer maintaining the
fund;
(h) “regulations of a fund” means the specific regulations governing the
constitution and administration of a particular provident fund; and
(i) “salary” includes dearness allowance, if provided for in the terms of
employment, but excludes all other allowances and perquisites.
3. Recognition to provident fund and its withdrawal.—(1) The approving
authority may grant recognition to a provident fund, which in his opinion, satisfies
the conditions prescribed in paragraph 4 and the rules made by the Board in this
regard and may, at any time, withdraw such recognition if, in his opinion, the
provident fund violates any of those conditions
(2) An order granting recognition shall take effect on such date specified by
the approving authority as per any rules made by Board in this behalf, such date not
being later than the last day of the tax year in which the order is made.
(3) An order withdrawing recognition shall take effect from the date on which it is made.
(4) An order according recognition to a provident fund shall not, unless the
approving authority otherwise directs, be affected by the fact that—

542

543

(a) the fund is subsequently amalgamated with another provident fund
on the occurrence of an amalgamation of the undertakings in connection with
which the two funds are maintained; or
(b) the fund subsequently absorbs the whole or a part of another
provident fund belonging to an undertaking which is wholly or in part
transferred to or merged in the undertaking of the employer maintaining the
first-mentioned fund.
4. Conditions to be satisfied by recognised provident funds.—In order to
receive and retain recognition, a provident fund, shall, subject to the provisions of
paragraph 5, satisfy the following conditions and any other conditions as
prescribed —
(a) all employees shall be employed in India, or employed by an
employer whose principal place of business is in India;
(b) the contributions of an employee in any year shall be a fixed
proportion of his salary for that year, deducted by the employer from each
periodical payment of salary in that proportion and credited to the employee’s
individual account in the fund;
(c) the employer’s contributions to the employee’s account in any year
shall not exceed the employee’s contribution in year, and shall be credited to
the employee’s account at intervals not exceeding one year;
(d) the fund shall be vested in two or more trustees or the Official Trustee
under a trust which shall not be revocable, except with the consent of all the
beneficiaries;
(e) the fund shall consist only of––
(i) contributions as specified above, received by the trustees;
(ii) accumulations thereof;
(iii) interest credited in respect of such contributions and
accumulations;
(iv) securities purchased there with; and
(v) any capital gains arising from the transfer of capital assets of
the fund;
(f) the fund shall be the fund of an establishment—
(i) to which the provisions of section 1(3) of the Employees’
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
(19 of 1952) apply; or
(ii) notified by the Central Provident Fund Commissioner under
section 1(4) of the said Act,
and such establishment shall be exempted from the operation of all or any of the
provisions of any scheme mentioned in section 17 of the said Act;
(g) the employer, subject to clause (h), shall not be entitled to recover
any sum from the fund, except when the employee—
(i) is dismissed for misconduct; or
(ii) voluntarily leaves his employment otherwise than due to
ill-health or other unavoidable cause before the end of the term of service
specified in the regulations of the fund;
(h) for the purposes of clause (g), the recovery made by the employer
shall be limited to––

544

(i) the contributions made by him to the individual account of the
employee;
(ii) interest credited in respect of such contributions as per the
regulations of the fund; and
(iii) the accumulations thereof;
(i) the accumulated balance due to an employee shall be payable on the day he
ceases to be an employee of the employer maintaining the fund;
(j) except as provided in clause (i) or as per conditions and restrictions
prescribed, no portion of the balance to the credit of an employee shall be payable
to him.
5. Relaxation of conditions.—(1) Irrespective of anything contained in
paragraph 4(a), the approving authority may, if he thinks fit and subject to such
conditions that he thinks proper to attach to such recognition, record recognition to
a fund which is—
(a) maintained by an employer whose principal place of business is
outside India; and
(b) the proportion of employees employed outside India does not exceed 10 %.
(2) Irrespective of anything contained in paragraph 4(b), an employee who
retains his employment––
(a) while serving in the armed forces of the Union; or
(b) when taken into or employed in the national service under any law
for the time being in force,
may, contribute to the fund during such service in the armed forces or employment
in the national service, a sum not exceeding the amount he would have contributed
had he continued to serve the employer, whether he received any salary or not from
the employer.
(3) Irrespective of anything contained in paragraph 4(e) or paragraph 4(i),—
(a) at the request made in writing by the employee who ceases to be an
employee of the employer maintaining the fund, the trustees of the fund may
agree to retain the whole or any part of the accumulated balance to be drawn
by him at any time on demand;
(b) when the accumulated balance due to such employee is retained in
the fund as per clause (a), the fund may also include interest in respect of such
accumulated balance; and
(c) the fund may also consist of any amount and interest thereof
transferred from the employee’s individual account in any recognised
provident fund maintained by his former employer.
(4) Subject to any rules made by the Board, the approving authority may relax
the provisions of paragraph 4(c) for any particular fund,—
(a) to permit the payment of larger contributions by an employer to the
employee’s individual account whose salary does not exceed five hundred rupees
per month; and
(b) to permit the employers to credit the employees’ individual accounts
with periodical bonuses or contributions of a contingent nature, when the
calculation and payment of such bonuses or contributions is provided for on
definite principles by the regulations of the fund.

545

(5) Irrespective of anything contained in paragraph 4(j), in order to allow an
employee to pay the amount of tax assessed on his total income under
paragraph 11(4), such employee shall be allowed to withdraw from the balance
amount to his credit in the recognised provident fund, a sum not exceeding the
difference between such amount and the amount to which he would have been
assessed if the transferred balance referred to in paragraph 11(2) had not been
included in the total income.
6. Employer’s annual contributions, when deemed to be income received by
employee.—The portion of the annual accretion in the tax year to the employee’s
balance in a recognised provident fund consisting of—
(a) contributions made by the employer exceeding 12% of the
employee’s salary; and
(b) interest credited on the balance to the credit of an employee in so far
as it is allowed at a rate exceeding such rate as fixed by the Central
Government by notification,
shall be deemed to have been received by the employee and included in his total
income for that tax year and shall be liable to income tax.
7. Exemption for employee’s contributions.—An employee participating in a
recognised provident fund shall, in respect of his own contributions to his individual
account in the fund in the tax year, be entitled to a deduction in the computation of
his total income of an amount determined as per section 123.
8. Exclusion from total income of accumulated balance.—(1) Subject to the
provisions of sub-paragraph (2), the accumulated balance due and payable to an
employee shall be excluded from the computation of his total income—
(a) if the employee has rendered continuous service with his employer
for five years or more;
(b) even if, the employee has not served continuously, the service was
terminated due to––
(i) the employee’s ill-health; or
(ii) by the contraction or closure of the employer’s business; or
(iii) other cause beyond the control of the employee;
(c) if, on the cessation of his employment, the employee obtains
employment with any other employer, to the extent the accumulated balance
due and becoming payable to him is transferred to his individual account in
any recognised provident fund maintained by such other employer; or
(d) the entire balance standing to the employee’s credit is transferred to
his account under a pension scheme referred to in section 124 and notified by
the Central Government;
(2) Where the accumulated balance due and payable to an employee includes
any amount transferred from another recognised provident fund or funds of a
previous employer or employers, the continuous service period for the purposes of
sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (g) shall include the period or periods served under the
aforesaid previous employer or employers.
9. Tax on accumulated balance.—Where the accumulated balance due to an
employee is included in his total income owing to the provisions of paragraph 8 not
being applicable, then—
(a) the Assessing Officer shall calculate the total of the various sums of
tax which would have been payable by the employee in respect of his total
income for each of the years concerned if the fund had not been a recognised
provident fund; and

546

(b) the amount by which such total exceeds the total of all sums paid by
or on behalf of such employee by way of tax for such years shall be payable
by the employee in addition to any other tax for which he may be liable for
the tax year in which the accumulated balance due to him becomes payable.
10. Deduction at source of tax payable on accumulated balance.—In cases
where paragraph 9 applies––
(a) the trustees of a recognised provident fund; or
(b) any person authorised by the regulations of the fund to make payment
of accumulated balances due to employees,
shall deduct from the accumulated balance at the time of payment, the amount payable
under the rule and the provisions of Chapter XIX-B shall apply as if the accumulated
balance were income chargeable under the head “Salaries”.
11. Treatment of balance in newly recognised provident fund.—(1) Where
recognition is accorded to a provident fund with existing balances, an account shall
be made of the fund up to the day immediately preceding the day on which the
recognition takes effect,—
(a) showing the balance to the credit of each employee on such day; and
(b) containing such further particulars as prescribed.
(2) The account shall also show in respect of balance to the credit of each employee—
(a) the amount thereof to be transferred to the employee’s account in the
recognised provident fund (hereinafter called his transferred balance); and
(b) such “transferred balance” shall be shown as balance to his credit in
the recognised provident fund on the date on which the recognition takes
effect, and sub-paragraph (4) and paragraph 5(5) shall apply accordingly.
(3) Any part of the balance to the credit of each employee in the existing fund not
transferred to the recognised fund shall be excluded from the recognised fund’s account
and shall be liable to income-tax as per the provisions of this Act, other than this Part.
(4) Subject to rules made by the Board in this behalf,—
(a) the Assessing Officer shall calculate the aggregate of all amounts in
the transferred balance that would have been liable to income-tax if this Part
had been in force since the fund’s institution, without regard to any tax which
may have been paid on any amount;
(b) the aggregate of amounts in a transferred balance, if any, shall be
deemed to be income received by the employee in the tax year in which the
recognition of the fund takes effect and shall be included in the employee’s
total income for that tax year;
(c) for the purposes of assessment, the remainder of the transferred
balance shall be disregarded, but no other exemption or relief, by way of
refund or otherwise, shall be granted in respect of any sum comprised in such
transferred balance.
(5) In cases of serious accounting difficulty, the approving authority may, subject
to rules, make a summary calculation of the aggregate as provided in sub-paragraph (4).
(6) Nothing in this paragraph shall affect the rights of the persons administering
an unrecognised provident fund or dealing with it, or with the balance to the credit of
any individual employee prior to recognition, in any manner permitted by law.
12. Accounts of recognised provident funds.—(1) The accounts of a
recognised provident fund shall be maintained by the trustees of the fund in such
form, for such period, and contain such particulars, as prescribed.

547

(2) The accounts shall be available to inspection by the income-tax authorities
at all reasonable times, and the trustees shall provide the Assessing Officer with the
abstracts of such accounts as prescribed.
13. Appeals.—(1) An employer objecting to an order of the approving
authority not granting recognition or withdrawing recognition from a provident fund
may appeal to the Board, within sixty days of such order
(2) The appeal shall be in such form and verified in such manner, and subject
to the payment of such fee as prescribed.
14. Treatment of fund transferred by employer to trustee.—(1) When an
employer who maintains a provident fund, whether recognised or not, for the
benefit of his employees and has not transferred the fund or portion of it, transfers
such fund or portion to trustees in trust for the participating employees, the
transferred amount shall be deemed to be of the nature of capital expenditure.
(2) When an employee receives the accumulated balance due to him from the
fund, any portion of such balance representing the employee’s share of the amount
transferred to the trustees (without addition of interest and exclusive of employee’s
contributions and interest thereon) shall be deemed to be,—
(a) employer’s expenditure under 34;
(b) incurred in the tax year in which the accumulated balance due to the
employee is paid,
provided an arrangement for deduction of tax at source has been made from the
amount of such share by the employer.
PART B
APPROVED SUPERANNUATION FUNDS AND GRATUITY FUNDS
[See sections 2(9) and (10)]
1. Interpretation.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,
“approving authority”, “employer”, “employee”, “contribution” and “salary”, in
relation to superannuation funds and gratuity funds shall have, the meanings as
assigned to those expressions in paragraph 2(a), (b), (c), (d) and (i) of Part A in
relation to provident funds.
2. According approval to superannuation fund and its withdrawal.—(1) The
approving authority may grant approval to any superannuation fund or its part, or
any gratuity fund, as the case may be, which in his opinion satisfies the conditions
prescribed in paragraph 3, and may withdraw such approval at any time, if, in his
opinion, the circumstances cease to warrant such approval.
(2) The approving authority shall inform the trustees of the fund, in writing,
the grant of approval with the date on which the approval is to take effect and the
conditions subject to which such approval is granted, if any.
(3) The approving authority shall inform the trustees of the fund, in writing,
any withdrawal of approval along with the reasons and the date on which the
withdrawal is to take effect.
(4) The approving authority shall not refuse or withdraw any approval without
giving the trustees a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
3. Conditions for approval.—In order to receive and retain approval, a
superannuation fund or a gratuity fund, as the case may be, shall satisfy the
following conditions, and any other conditions as prescribed:—
(a) the fund shall be established under an irrevocable trust in connection
with a trade or an undertaking carried on in India, with at least 90% employees
employed in India;

548

(b) the sole purpose of the fund shall be to the provision of annuities or
gratuity, as the case may be, for employees in the trade or undertaking––
(i) upon their retirement at or after a specified age;
(ii) upon incapacitation before retirement;
(iii) on termination of employment after a minimum period of
service specified in the rules of the gratuity fund; or
(iv) for the widows, children or dependants of such employees on
their death;
(c) the employer in the trade or undertaking shall contribute to the
fund; and
(d) all annuities, pensions and other benefits, granted from the fund shall
be payable only in India.
4. Application for approval.—(1) An application for approval of a superannuation
fund or part of it, or any gratuity fund, as the case may be, shall be made in writing by
the trustees to the Assessing Officer by whom the employer is assessable, and shall be
accompanied by—
(a) a copy of the instrument establishing the fund and two copies of the
rules thereof; and
(b) two copies of the accounts of the fund relating to such earlier year or
years (not more than three years immediately preceding the year in which the
said application is made) for which the accounts have been made up, if the
fund has been in existence before the financial year in which the application
for approval is made.
(2) In addition to the documents referred to in sub-paragraph (1), the approving
authority may require such further information to be furnished as he thinks proper.
(3) If any alteration is made to the rules, constitution, objects or conditions of the
fund after the date of the application for approval,––
(a) the trustees shall immediately inform such alterations to the Assessing
Officer mentioned in sub-paragraph (1); and
(b) failure to inform such alterations may result in the approval given, if any,
be deemed to be withdrawn from the date on which the alteration took effect,
unless the approving authority orders otherwise.
5. Contributions by employer when deemed to be income of employer.—If a
gratuity is paid to an employee during his lifetime, the gratuity shall be treated as salary
paid to the employee for the purposes of this Act.
6. Amount deemed to be income of employer.—When contributions by an
employer (including the interest, if any) are repaid to the employer, the amount so repaid
shall be deemed for the purposes of income-tax to be the income of the employer of the
tax year in which they are so repaid.
7. Deduction of tax on contributions paid to an employee.—(1) When any
contributions made by an employer to an approved superannuation fund, including
interest are paid to an employee during his lifetime under conditions other than those
specified in Schedule II (Table: Sl. No. 8), tax on the amounts so paid shall be deducted
at the average rate of tax applicable to the employee—
(a) during the previous three years; or
(b) during the period for which the employee was a member of the fund, if
the period is less than three years.

549

(2) The trustees shall pay the tax so deducted to the Central Government within
the time and manner, as prescribed.
8. Deduction from pay of an contributions on behalf of employee to be included
in return.—When an employer deducts contributions from the emoluments of the
employee or pays on his behalf any contributions to an approved superannuation fund,
all such deductions or payments shall be included in the statement which is required
under section 397(3)(b).
9. Appeal.—(1) An employer objecting to an order of the approving authority
refusing to grant approval to a superannuation fund, or a gratuity fund, as the case may
be, or withdrawing such approval may appeal to the Board within sixty days of such
order.
(2) The appeal shall be in such form and verified in such manner and subject to
the payment of such fee, as prescribed.
10. Liability of trustees on cessation of approval.—If a fund or a part of a fund
for any reason ceases to be an approved superannuation fund, the trustees of the fund
shall nevertheless remain liable to tax on any sum paid on account of returned
contributions (including interest on contributions, if any), in so far as the sum so paid
is in respect of contributions made before the fund or part of the fund ceased to be an
approved superannuation fund under the provisions of this Part.
11. Liabilities of trustees.—If a gratuity fund for any reason ceases to be an
approved gratuity fund, the trustees shall nevertheless remain liable to tax on any
gratuity paid to any employee.
12. Particulars to be furnished in respect of superannuation funds.—The trustees
of an approved superannuation fund or an approved gratuity fund and any employer
who contributes to such a fund shall furnish such returns, statement, particulars or
information, as required by notice from the Assessing Officer within the specified
period, not being less than twenty-one days from the date of the notice.
PART C
POWER TO MAKE RULES FOR PROVIDENT FUNDS, SUPERANNUATION FUNDS AND
GRATUITY FUNDS

1. Power of Board to make rules for fund.—In addition to powers granted by
Part A and Part B of this Schedule, the Board may make rules for a fund (provident
fund or superannuation fund or gratuity fund) in respect of the following:—
(a) to provide for the statements and information to be submitted along
with an application for approval or recognition for a fund;
(b) to provide for the returns, statements, particulars, or information which
the Assessing Officer may require from the trustees of an approved
superannuation fund or from the employer;
(c) to limit the ordinary annual and other contributions of an employer to
the gratuity fund or an approved superannuation fund;
(d) to limit the contributions to a recognised provident fund by employees
who are shareholders in the company;
(e) to regulate investment or deposit of the moneys of a recognised or an
approved fund, subject to the condition that no rule shall require more than 50%
of the fund’s money to be invested in Government securities as defined in
section 2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944;

550

(f) to provide for the assessment by way of penalty of any consideration
received by an employee for an assignment of, or creation of a charge upon, his
beneficial interest in a recognised or an approved fund;
(g) to determine the extent and manner of exemption from payment of tax
on contributions and interest credited to the individual account of the employee
in a provident fund from which recognition has been withdrawn;
(h) to determine the extent and manner of exemption from payment of tax
on any payment made from a superannuation fund from which approval has
been withdrawn;
(i) to provide for the withdrawal of the approval of a superannuation
fund or gratuity fund, which ceases to satisfy the requirements of this Part or
the rules made thereunder; and
(j) to carry out any other the purpose of this Part and to secure such
further control over the recognition or approval of the funds and the
administration of such funds as it may deem requisite.
2. Rules to be subject section 534.—All rules made under this Part shall
be subject to section 534.

551

SCHEDULE XII
(See section 51)
PART A
MINERALS
1. Aluminium ores.
2. Apatite and phosphatic ores.
3. Beryl.
4. Chrome ore.
5. Coal and lignite.
6. Columbite, Samarskite and other minerals of the “rare earths” group.
7. Copper.
8. Gold.
9. Gypsum.
10. Iron ore.
11. Lead.
12. Manganese ore.
13. Molybdenum.
14. Nickel ores.
15. Platinum and other precious metals and their ores.
16. Pitchblende and other uranium ores.
17. Precious stones.
18. Rutile.
19. Silver.
20. Sulphur and its ores.
21. Tin.
22. Tungsten ores.
23. Uraniferous allanite, monazite and other thorium minerals.
24. Uranium bearing tailings left over from ores after extraction of copper and
gold, ilmenite and other titanium ores.
25. Vanadium ores.
26. Zinc.
27. Zircon.
PART B
GROUPS OF ASSOCIATED MINERALS
1. Apatite, Beryl, Cassiterite, Columbite, Emerald, Felspar, Lepidolite, Mica,
Pitchblende, Quartz, Samarskite, Scheelite, Topaz, Tantalite, Tourmaline.
2. Iron, Manganese, Titanium, Vanadium and Nickel minerals.

551

552

3. Lead, Zinc, Copper, Cadmium, Arsenic, Antimony, Bismuth, Cobalt,
Nickel, Molybdenum, and Uranium minerals, and Gold and Silver, Arsenopyrite,
Chalcopyrite, Pyrite, Pyrrhotite and Pentlandite.
4. Chromium, Osmiridium, Platinum and Nickel minerals.
5. Kyanite, Sillimanite, Corundum, Dumortierite and Topaz.
6. Gold, Silver, Tellurium, Selenium and Pyrite.
7. Barytes, Fluorite, Chalcocite, Selenium, and minerals of Zinc, Lead and
Silver.
8. Tin and Tungsten minerals.
9. Limestone, Dolomite and Magnesite.
10. Ilmenite, Monazite, Zircon, Rutile, Garnet and Sillimanite.
11. Sulphides of Copper and Iron.
12. Coal, Fire clay and Shale.
13. Magnetite and Apatite.
14. Magnesite and Chromite.
15. Talc (Soapstone and Steatite) and Dolomite.
16. Bauxite, Laterite, Aluminous Clays, Lithomarge, Titanium, Vanadium,
Gallium and Columbium minerals.

553

SCHEDULE XIII
[See sections 45(2)(c) and (d)]
LIST OF ARTICLES OR THINGS
1. Beer, wine and other alcoholic spirits.
2. Tobacco and tobacco preparations, such as, cigars and cheroots, cigarettes,
biris, smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes, chewing tobacco and snuff.
3. Cosmetics and toilet preparations.
4. Tooth paste, dental cream, tooth powder and soap.
5. Aerated waters in the manufacture of which blended flavouring
concentrates (including synthetic essence) in any form are used.
6. Confectionery and chocolates.
7. Gramophones, including record players, and gramophone records.
8. Projectors.
9. Photographic apparatus and goods.
10. Office machines and apparatus such as typewriters, calculating machines,
cash registering machines, cheque writing machines, intercom machines and
teleprinters including all machines and apparatus used in offices, shops, factories,
workshops, educational institutions, railway stations, hotels and restaurants for
doing office work and for data processing including calculating machines and
calculating devices not being computers.
11. Steel furniture, whether made partly or wholly of steel.
12. Safes, strong boxes, cash and deed boxes and strong room doors.
13. Latex foam sponge and polyurethane foam.
14. Crown corks, or other fittings of cork, rubber, polyethylene or any other
material.
15. Pilfer-proof caps for packaging or other fittings of cork, rubber,
polyethylene or any other material.

553

554

SCHEDULE XIV
(See section 55)
INSURANCE BUSINESS
A.—Life insurance business
1. Profits of life insurance business to be computed separately.—If a person is
engaged in life insurance business during the tax year, the profits and gains of such
business shall be computed separately from profits and gains of any other business.
2. Computation of profits of life insurance business.—(1) The profits and gains
from life insurance business shall be the annual average of the surplus after adjusting
the surplus or deficit disclosed by the actuarial valuation made as per the Insurance
Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) for the last inter-valuation period ending before the
commencement of tax year, so as to exclude from it any surplus or deficit from any
earlier inter-valuation period.
(2) Any expenditure which is inadmissible under section 34 in computing the
profits and gains of a business, shall be added to such profits and gains of life
insurance business.
3. Adjustment of tax paid by deduction at source.—When an assessment of
the life insurance business profits is made based on the annual average of a surplus
disclosed by a valuation for an inter-valuation period exceeding twelve months,
then, in computing the income-tax, payable for that year credit shall––
(a) not be given as per section 386 for the income-tax paid in the
preceding tax year;
(b) be given for the annual average of the income-tax paid by deduction
at source from interest on securities or otherwise during such period.
B.—Other insurance business
4. Computation of profits and gains of other insurance business.—(1)The
profits and gains of any insurance business other than life insurance shall be the
profit before tax and appropriations as disclosed in the profit and loss account
prepared as per the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) or the rules made thereunder or
the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (4 of 1999) or the
regulations made subject to the following adjustments:––
(a) any expenditure or allowance including any amount debited to profit
and loss account either by way of a provision for any tax, dividend, reserve, or
any other provision as prescribed, which is inadmissible under sections 28 to 54
shall be added back;
(b) gain or loss from realisation of investments shall be added or
deducted, if not already credited or debited to the profit and loss account;
(c) provision for diminution in investment value debited to the profit and
loss account, shall be added back; and
(d) such amount carried over to a reserve for unexpired risks as
prescribed shall be allowed as a deduction.
(2) The amount payable under section 37, added under paragraph (1)(a) shall
be allowed as deduction in the tax year in which it is actually paid.
C.—Other provisions
5. Profits and gains of non-resident person.—(1) The profits and gains of a
non-resident person who is engaged in the insurance business through its branches
in India may, in the absence of reliable data, be deemed to be that proportion of
his global income which corresponds to the proportion the premium income
derived from India bears to his total premium income.
554

555

(2) In this paragraph, the global income in relation to life insurance business
of a person not resident in India shall be computed as per this Act for computing
the profits and gains of life Insurance business carried on in India.
.

6. Interpretation.—(1) In this schedule,––
(a) “investments” includes securities, stocks and shares; and
(b) “life insurance business” means life insurance business as defined
in section 2(11) of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938).
(2) References of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) in this Schedule
regarding the Life Insurance Corporation of India shall be treated as references to
that Act or section 43 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956).

556

SCHEDULE XV
(See section 123)
DEDUCTION IN RESPECT OF LIFE INSURANCE PREMIA, CONTRIBUTION TO PROVIDENT
FUND, SUBSCRIPTION TO CERTAIN EQUITY SHARES, ETC.
1. Sums qualifying as deduction.—The amounts paid or deposited in the tax year
by the assessee, which qualify as deduction for the purpose of section 123 are––
(a) premium paid for a life insurance policy––
(i) in the case of an individual, on life of such individual, spouse
of the individual and any child of the individual;
(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, on life of any
member of the Hindu undivided family,
subject to paragraph 2;
(b) sum paid under a deferred annuity contract other than the annuity
plan referred to in clause (1) on life of the individual, spouse of the
individual and any child of the individual, and such contract does not contain
an option to receive cash payment in lieu of the annuity;
(c) sum deducted from salary payable by or on behalf of the
Government to any individual for securing deferred annuity or making
provision for his spouse or children, to the extent of 20% of salary;
(d) contribution by an individual to any provident fund to which the
Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) applies;
(e) contribution to an account with any provident fund, set up and
notified by the Central Government, in the name of,––
(i) in the case of an individual, such individual, spouse of the
individual and any child of the individual;
(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, any member thereof;
(f) contribution by an employee to a recognised provident fund;
(g) contribution by an employee to an approved superannuation fund;
(h) subscription to any security or deposit scheme notified by the
Central Government in the name of an individual or any girl child of that
individual, or any girl child for whom such person is the legal guardian, if
the scheme so specifies;
(i) subscription to savings certificate as mentioned in section 3(k) of
the Government Savings Banks Act, 1873, (5 of 1873), as notified by the
Central Government;
(j) contribution for participation in Unit-linked Insurance Plan, 1971
specified in Schedule II of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking
and Repeal) Act, 2002 (58 of 2002),––
(i) in the case of an individual, in the name of such individual,
spouse of the individual and any child of the individual;
(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, in the name of any
member thereof;
(k) contribution for participation in unit-linked insurance plan of Life
Insurance Corporation Mutual Fund, referred to in Schedule VII
(Table: Sl. No. 20 or 21), as notified by the Central Government,—
(i) in the case of an individual, in the name of such individual,
spouse of the individual and any child of the individual;

556

557

(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, in the name of any
member thereof;
(l) sum paid towards contract for annuity plan of the Life Insurance
Corporation or any other insurer notified by the Central Government;
(m) subscription to any units of––
(i) any Mutual Fund referred to in serial number 20 or 21 of the
Table in Schedule VII; or
(ii) the Administrator; or
(iii) the specified company,
under any plan formulated as per such scheme notified by the Central
Government;
(n) contribution by an individual to any pension fund set up by––
(i) any Mutual Fund referred to in Schedule VII (Table: Sl.
No. 20 or 21); or
(ii) the Administrator; or
(iii) the specified company,
as notified by the Central Government;
(o) subscription to a deposit scheme or contribution to a pension fund,
set up by the National Housing Bank established under section 3 of the
National Housing Bank Act, 1987 (53 of 1987), as notified by the Central
Government;
(p) subscription to any deposit schemes of––
(i) a public sector company engaged in providing long-term
finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential
purposes; or
(ii) an authority constituted in India by any law, for the purpose
of dealing with and satisfying the need for housing accommodation or
for the purpose of planning, development or improvement of cities,
towns and villages, or for both,
as notified by the Central Government;
(q) tuition fees (excluding any development fees or donation or payment
of similar nature) paid by an individual to any University, college, school or
other educational institution situated in India (at the time of admission or
thereafter), for full time education of any two children of such individual;
(r) payment made for purchase or construction of a residential house
property the income from which is chargeable to tax under the head “Income
from house property” (or which would, if it had not been used for the own
residence of the assessee, have been chargeable to tax under that head),
subject to satisfaction of conditions laid down in paragraph 3;
(s) term deposit for a fixed period of not less than five years with a
scheduled bank, and which is as per such scheme framed and notified by the
Central Government;
(t) subscription to bonds issued by the National Bank for Agriculture
and Rural Development, as notified by the Central Government;
(u) deposit in an account under the Senior Citizen Savings Scheme
Rules, 2004;

558

(v) five years term deposit in an account under the Post Office Time
Deposit Rules, 1981;
(w) contribution by an employee of the Central Government to an
additional account referred to in section 20(3) of the Pension Fund
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013 (23 of 2013) of the
pension scheme notified by the Central Government,––
(a) for a fixed period of not less than three years; and
(b) which is as per the scheme as notified by the Central
Government for the purposes of this clause;
(x) contribution made from income chargeable to tax to effect or keep
in force a contract for any annuity plan of Life Insurance Corporation of
India or any other insurer for receiving pension from the fund referred to in
Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 3);
(y) contribution made by an individual to a pension scheme notified by
the Central Government, to the extent of––
(i) 10% of salary, including dearness allowance, if the terms of
employment so provide, but excluding all other allowances and
perquisites, during the tax year in the case of an employee of the
Central Government or any other employer; or
(ii) 20% of gross total income during the tax year in the case of
any other individual;
(z) subscription to––
(i) equity shares or debentures forming part of any eligible issue
of capital approved by the Board on an application made by a public
company or as subscription to any eligible issue of capital by any
public financial institution in the prescribed form;
(ii) any units of any mutual fund referred to in Schedule VII
(Table: Sl. No. 20 or 21) and approved by the Board on an application
made by such mutual fund in the prescribed form and if the amount of
subscription to such units is subscribed only in the eligible issue of
capital of any company.
2. Payment on insurance policy.—(1) The deductions shall apply only to so
much of any premium or other payment made on an insurance policy, other than
a contract for a deferred annuity,––
(a) as is up to 20% of the actual capital sum assured, in respect of a
policy issued on or before the 31st March, 2012;
(b) as is up to 10% of the actual capital sum assured, in respect of a
policy issued on or after the 1st April, 2012;
(c) as is up to 15% of the actual capital sum assured, if the policy is
issued on or after the 1st April, 2013 and where such policy covers the
life of,––
(i) a person with a disability or severe disability as referred to in
section 154; or
(ii) a person suffering from a disease or ailment specified in the
rules made under section 128.
(2) In this paragraph, “actual capital sum assured” shall mean the minimum
amount assured under the policy on happening of the insured event at any time
during the term of the policy, not taking into account—

559

(a) the value of any premiums agreed to be returned; or
(b) any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over and above the sum
actually assured, which is to be or may be received under the policy by any person.
3. Payments made for purchase or construction of residential house property.—
The deduction in respect of amount spent for purchase or construction of a residential
house property as provided in paragraph 1(r) shall––
(a) include payments that are made towards or by way of—
(i) any instalment or part payment of the amount due under any
self-financing or other scheme of any development authority, housing
board or other authority engaged in the construction and sale of house
property on ownership basis; or
(ii) any instalment or part payment of the amount due to any
company or co-operative society of which the assessee is a shareholder
or member towards the cost of the house property allotted to him; or
(iii) repayment of the amount borrowed by the assessee from—
(A) the Central Government or any State Government; or
(B) any bank, including a co-operative bank; or
(C) the Life Insurance Corporation; or
(D) the National Housing Bank; or
(E) any public company formed and registered in India with
the main object of carrying on the business of providing
long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in India
for residential purposes which is eligible for deduction under
section 32(e); or
(F) any company in which the public are substantially
interested or any co-operative society, where such company or
co-operative society is engaged in the business of financing the
construction of houses; or
(G) the employer where such employer is an authority or a
board or a corporation or any other body established or
constituted under a Central Act or State Act; or
(H) the employer of the assessee where such employer is a
public company or a public sector company or a University
established by law or a college affiliated to such University or a
local authority or a co-operative society; or
(iv) stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses for the
purpose of transfer of such house property to the assessee;
(b) not include any payment towards or by way of—
(i) the admission fee, cost of share and initial deposit which a
shareholder of a company or a member of a co-operative society has to
pay for becoming such shareholder or member; or
(ii) the cost of any addition or alteration to, or renovation or
repair of, the house property, which is carried out after the issue of the
completion certificate in respect of the house property by the authority
competent to issue it, or after the house property or any part thereof
has either been occupied by the assessee or any other person on his
behalf, or been let out; or.
(iii) any expenditure in respect of which deduction is allowable
under section 22.

560

4. Withdrawal of deduction and taxation of deduction already allowed.—
The deductions in the nature of payments specified in column B of the Table below
shall not be allowable in the tax year in which the conditions specified in column
C of the said Table are fulfilled, and the aggregate amount of the deductions
allowed thus far in the preceding tax year or tax years shall be deemed to be the
income of the assessee and liable to tax in such tax year..
Table
Sl.
No.

Nature of payment

Conditions for disallowance of the deduction in
respect of payment provided in column B

A

B

C

1.

Premium paid
Where the assessee terminates his contract of,
for a life insurance by notice to that effect or where the contract
ceases to be in force by reason of failure to pay
policy.
any premium, by not reviving contract of
insurance,—
(a) in case of any single premium policy,
within two years after the date of
commencement of insurance; or
(b) in any other case, before premiums have
been paid for two years.

2.

(a) Contribution
Where the assessee terminates his participation
for participation in in such plan, by notice to that effect or where he
the
Unit-Linked ceases to participate by reason of failure to pay
Insurance
Plan, any contribution, by not reviving his participation,
1971;
before contributions in respect of such
(b) contribution participation have been paid for five years.
for participation in
the
unit-linked
insurance plan of
Life
Insurance
Corporation
Mutual Fund.

3.

Certain
payments made for
purchase
or
construction
of
residential house
property.

Where the assessee––
(a) transfers the house property before the
expiry of five years from the end of the tax year
in which possession of such property is
obtained by him; or
(b) receives back, whether by way of refund
or otherwise, any sum specified in that clause.

4.

Certain
payments
for
subscription to any
equity shares or
debentures forming
part of any eligible
issue of capital by a
public company or
by any public
financial institution
and approved by
Board.

(a) Where the assessee sells or otherwise transfers
to any person at any time within a period of three years
from the date of their acquisition; and
(b) such shares or debentures shall be treated as
having acquired by the person on the date on
which his name is entered in relation to those
shares or debentures in the register of members or
of debenture-holders, as the case may be, of the
public company.

561

5. Taxation of receipts where deduction already allowed.—Where
deductions in the nature of payments specified in column B of the Table below
have been allowed, and the conditions specified in column C of the said Table are
fulfilled in any tax year, the amounts received shall be taxed in such tax year in
the manner as provided in column D of the said Table.
Table
Sl
No.

Nature of
payment

Condition
taxation

A

B

C

1.

(a) Deposit in
an account under
the
Senior
Citizen Savings
Scheme Rules,
2004

If any amount,
including interest
accrued,
in
respect of the
account provided
in column B, is
withdrawn by the
assessee, before
the expiry of the
period of five
years from the
date
of
its
deposit.

(b) five year
term deposit in an
account under the
Post Office Time
Deposit Rules,
1981.

2.

Contribution
to effect or keep
in
force
a
contract for any
annuity plan of
Life Insurance
Corporation of
India or any other
insurer
for
receiving pension
from the fund
referred to in
Schedule
VII
(Table: Sl. No. 3).

for

Manner and amount of taxation in
the tax year in which condition in
column C is fulfilled.
D

(a) The amount so withdrawn
shall be deemed to be the
income of the assessee of the tax
year in which the amount is
withdrawn and shall be liable to
tax in the said year;
(b) the amount liable to tax, as
referred in clause (a), shall not
include the following amounts:—
(i) any amount of interest,
which has been included in the
total income of the assessee of
the tax year or years preceding
such tax year; and
(ii) any amount received by
the nominee or legal heir of
the assessee, on the death of
such assessee, other than
interest, if any, accrued
thereon, which was not
included in the total income of
the assessee for the tax year or
years preceding such tax year.
Where
any
An amount equal to the whole
amount standing to of the amount referred to in
the credit of the column C (a) or (b) shall be
assessee in the deemed to be the income of the
pension fund, in assessee or his nominee, in the
respect of which a tax year in which such
deduction has been withdrawal is made or, pension
allowed, together is received, and shall be liable to
with the interest or tax in the said year.
bonus accrued or
credited to the of
the
assessee
account, if any, is
received by the
assessee or his
nominee,—
(a) on account
of the surrender of
the annuity plan
whether in whole
or in part, in any tax
year; or

562

A

B

C

D

(b) as pension
received from
the annuity plan.
3.

Contribution by
an individual to a
pension
scheme
notified by the
Central
Government.

Where any
amount
standing to the
credit of the
assessee in the
pension
scheme,
in
respect
of
which
a
deduction has
been allowed,
together with
the
amount
accrued
thereon, if any,
is received by
the assessee or
his nominee, in
whole or in
part, in any tax
year, and if
such amount is
not used for
purchasing an
annuity plan in
the same year—

The whole of the amount
referred to in column C (a) or
(b) shall be deemed to be the
income of the assessee or his
nominee, in the tax year in
which such amount is
received, and shall be liable to
tax in the said year.

(a)
on
account
of
closure or his
opting out of the
pension scheme
(except when
received by the
nominee on the
death of the
assessee); or
(b) as pension
received from
the annuity plan
purchased
or
taken on such
closure or opting
out.
6. Interpretation.—In this Schedule,––
(a) “Administrator” means the Administrator as referred to in section 2(a) of
the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 (58 of 2002);
(b) “contribution” to any fund shall not include any sums in
repayment of loan;
(c) “insurance” shall include,—

563

(i) a policy of insurance on the life of an individual or the spouse
or the child of such individual or a member of a Hindu undivided
family securing the payment of specified sum on the stipulated date of
maturity, if such person is alive on such date irrespective that the policy
of insurance provides only for the return of premiums paid (with or
without any interest thereon) in the event of such person dying before
the said stipulated date;
(ii) a policy of insurance effected by an individual or a member
of a Hindu undivided family for the benefit of a minor with the object
of enabling the minor, after he has attained majority to secure
insurance on his own life by adopting the policy and on his being alive
on a date (after such adoption) specified in the policy in this behalf;
(d) “Life Insurance Corporation” means the Life Insurance
Corporation of India established under the Life Insurance Corporation
Act, 1956 (31 of 1956);
(e) “public company” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 2(71) of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);
(f) “security” means a Government security as defined in section 2(2)
of the Public Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1994);
(g) “specified company” means a company as referred to in
section 2(h) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal)
Act, 2002 (58 of 2002);
(h) “transfer” shall be deemed to include also the transactions referred
to in section 269UA(f) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);
(i) “eligible issue of capital” means an issue made by a public company
formed and registered in India or a public financial institution and the entire
proceeds of the issue are utilised wholly and exclusively for the purposes of
any business referred to in section 135(9);
(j) “public financial institution” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 2(72) of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).

564

SCHEDULE XVI
(See section 350)
PERMITTED MODES OF INVESTMENT OR DEPOSITS
FORMS OR MODES OF INVESTMENT OR DEPOSITS BY A CHARITABLE OR RELIGIOUS
TRUST OR INSTITUTION

The modes of investing or depositing the money referred to in section 350
shall be the following:—
(1) investment in savings certificates as defined in section 2(c) of the
Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959 (46 of 1959), and any other
securities or certificates issued by the Central Government under the Small
Savings Schemes of that Government;
(2) deposit in any account with the Post Office Savings Bank;
(3) deposit in any account with a scheduled bank or a co-operative
society engaged in carrying on the business of banking (including a
co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank);
(4) investment in units of the Unit Trust of India;
(5) investment in any security for money created and issued by the
Central Government or a State Government;
(6) investment in debentures issued by, or on behalf of, any company or
corporation both the principal whereof and the interest whereon are fully and
unconditionally guaranteed by the Central Government or by a State Government;
(7) investment or deposit in any public sector company subject to the
condition that where an investment or deposit in any public sector company
has been made and such public sector company ceases to be a public sector
company,—
(a) such investment made in the shares of such company shall be
deemed to be an investment made under this clause for three years from
the date on which such public sector company ceases to be a public
sector company;
(b) such other investment or deposit shall be deemed to be an
investment or deposit made under this clause for the period up to the date
on which such investment or deposit becomes repayable by such company;
(8) deposits with or investment in any bonds issued by a financial corporation
which is engaged in providing long-term finance for industrial development in India
and which is eligible for deduction under section 32(1)(e);
(9) deposits with or investment in any bonds issued by a public company
formed and registered in India with the main object of carrying on the business of
providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for
residential purposes and which is eligible for deduction under section 32(1)(e);
(10) deposits with or investment in any bonds issued by a public
company formed and registered in India with the main object of carrying on
the business of providing long-term finance for urban infrastructure in India;
(11) investment in immovable property;
(12) deposits with the Industrial Development Bank of India established
under the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964);

564

565

(13) investment in the units issued under any scheme of the mutual fund
referred to in Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No.20) or (Table: Sl. No.21);
(14) any transfer of deposits to the Public Account of India;
(15) deposits made with an authority constituted in India by or under any
law enacted either for the purpose of dealing with and satisfying the need for
housing accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or
improvement of cities, towns and villages, or for both;
(16) investment by way of acquiring equity shares of a depository as
defined in section 2(1)(e) of the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996);
(17) investment made by a recognised stock exchange referred to in
section 2(f) of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956)
(hereafter referred to as investor) in the equity share capital of a company
(hereafter referred to as investee)—
(a) which is engaged in dealing with securities or mainly
associated with the securities market;
(b) whose main object is to acquire the membership of another
recognised stock exchange for the sole purpose of facilitating the members
of the investor to trade on the said stock exchange through the investee as
per the directions or guidelines issued under the Securities and Exchange
Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) by the Securities and Exchange Board
of India established under section 3 of that Act; and
(c) in which at least 51% of equity shares are held by the investor
and the balance equity shares are held by members of such investor;
(18) investment made by a person, authorised under section 4 of the
Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 (51 of 2007), in the equity share
capital or bonds or debentures of a company—
(a) which is engaged in operations of retail payments system or
digital payments settlement or similar activities in India and abroad and
is approved by the Reserve Bank of India for this purpose; and
(b) in which at least 51% of equity shares are held by National
Payments Corporation of India;
(19) investment made by a person, authorised under section 4 of the
Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 (51 of 2007), in the equity share
capital or bonds or debentures of Open Network for Digital Commerce Ltd,
being a company incorporated under section 7(2) read with section 8(1) of the
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), for participating in network based open
protocol models which enable digital commerce and interoperable digital
payments in India;
(20) investment by way of acquiring equity shares of an incubatee by an
incubator;
(21) investment by way of acquiring shares of National Skill
Development Corporation;
(22) investment in debt instruments issued by any infrastructure Finance
Company registered with the Reserve Bank of India;
(23) investment in “Stock Certificate” as defined in clause (c) of
paragraph 2 of the Sovereign Gold Bonds Scheme, 2015, published in the
Official Gazette vide notification number G.S.R. 827(E), dated the 30th
October, 2015;

566

(24) investment by way of Acquiring Units of Powergrid Infrastructure
Investment Trust;
(25) shares in a public sector company;
(26) any assets held by the trust or institution where such assets form
part of the corpus of the trust or institution as on the 1st June, 1973;
(27) any asset, being equity shares of a public company, held by any
university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical
institution where such assets form part of the corpus of any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution as on the
1st June, 1998, where it was approved at that time under the provisions of
section 10(23C) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of1961);
(28) any accretion to the shares, forming part of the corpus mentioned in
clause (1) or (2), by way of bonus shares allotted to the trust or institution;
(29) any assets (being debentures issued by, or on behalf of, any
company or corporation) acquired by the trust or institution before the
1st March, 1983;
(30) any asset, not being an investment or deposit in any of the forms or
modes specified in clause (1), where such asset is not so held after the expiry of
one year from the end of the tax year in which such asset is acquired;
(31) any funds representing the profits and gains of business, being
profits and gains of any tax year relevant to the tax year commencing on the
1st April, 1984 or any subsequent tax year so, however, where it has any other
income in addition to profits and gains of business, these provisions shall not
apply unless it maintains separate books of account in respect of such business;
(32) voluntary contributions received and maintained in the form of
jewellery, furniture or any other article as the Board may, by notification
specify;
(33) In this schedule,—
(a) “long-term finance” means any loan or advance where the terms
under which moneys are loaned or advanced provide for repayment along
with interest thereof during a period of not less than five years;
(b) “public company” shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in section 2(71) of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);
(c) “urban infrastructure” means a project for providing potable
water supply, sanitation and sewerage, drainage, solid waste
management, roads, bridges and flyovers or urban transport;
(d) “Immovable property” does not include any machinery or plant
(other than machinery or plant installed in a building for the convenient
occupation of the building) even though attached to, or permanently
fastened to, anything attached to the earth;
(e) “incubatee” shall mean such incubatee as may be notified by
the Government of India in the Ministry of Science and Technology;
(f) “incubator” shall mean such Technology Business Incubator or
Science and Technology Entrepreneurship Park as notified by the
Government of India in the Ministry of Science and Technology.

567

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Income-tax Act passed in 1961 has been subjected to numerous
amendments since its passage sixty years ago. As a result of these amendments
the basic structure of the Income-tax Act has been overburdened and language has
become complex, increasing cost of compliance for taxpayers and hampering
efficiency of direct-tax administration. Tax administrators, practitioners and
taxpayers have also raised concerns about the complicated provisions and
structure of the Income-tax Act.
Therefore, the Government in the budget in July 2024 announced that a time
bound comprehensive review of the Income-tax Act, 1961 would be undertaken
to make the Act concise, lucid, easy to read and understand. Accordingly, the
Income-tax Bill, 2025 has been prepared which proposes to repeal and replace the
Income-tax Act, 1961.
The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in
the Bill.

NEW DELHI;
The 8th February, 2025.

NIRMALA SITHARAMAN.

_____

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
_____
[Copy of letter No. 370134/18/2025 - TPL dated 10 February 2025 from
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs to the
Secretary General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Income-tax Bill,
2025, recommends the introduction and consideration of the Bill in Lok
Sabha under article 117(1) and (3), read with clause (1) of article 274
of the Constitution.
______

567

568

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1 of the Bill provides for the short title, extent and commencement
of the proposed legislation.
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for definition of various terms and expressions
used in the proposed legislation.
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for definition of “tax year”.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for charge of income-tax.
Clause 5 of the Bill defines the scope of total income for a person who is a
resident or a non-resident in India.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to provide for the conditions for determining the
residential status of a person in India.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to deal with income deemed to be received.
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for income on receipt of capital asset or stock
in trade by specified person from specified entity.
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for income deemed to accrue or arise in India,
including those from a business connection and provides the source rule for
income from Interest, dividend, royalty, fee for technical services, transfer of a
capital asset situated in India, etc.
Clause 10 of the Bill deals with apportionment of income between spouses
governed by Portuguese Civil Code.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide for incomes not included in total
income and, inter alia, provides for details of certain income enumerated in
Schedules II, III, IV, V and VI which are not to be included in computing the total
income of any person for a tax year. It also deals with certain persons enumerated
in Schedule VII who are not chargeable to tax under the proposed legislation for
a tax year.
Clause 12 of the Bill provides for income not to be included in total income
of political parties and electoral trust enumerated in Schedule VIII which are not
to be included in computing their total income for a tax year.
Clause 13 of the Bill provides for classification under various heads of
income for the purposes of charge of income-tax and computation of total income.
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for disallowance of certain expenditure
incurred in relation to income which does not form part of the total income and
expenditure in relation to such income.
Clause 15 of the Bill provides for under the head salaries.
Clause 16 of the Bill provides for different payments made by an employer
to an employee which may be taxed under this head of income which include
wages, annuity or pension, gratuity, commission, perquisites, profits in lieu of
salary, leave encashment, etc.
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for exclusion of certain benefits from the
definition of perquisites.

568

569

Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to define different payments in the nature of
“profits in lieu of salary” and also seeks to specify the payments that are not to be
regarded as “profits in lieu of salary”.
Clause 19 of the Bill provides for deductions available against salary
income. It also seeks to provide for calculation of the eligible amount of deduction
with the help of formula.
Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the charge of income-tax under the head
“Income from house property” on the annual value of property consisting of any
buildings or lands appurtenant thereto.
Clause 21 of the Bill provides for determination of annual value and also
seeks to define the annual value of property.
Clause 22 of the Bill provides for deductions from income from house
property.
Clause 23 of the Bill provides for taxability of arrears or unrealised rent
received subsequently irrespective of ownership of the property in tax year.
Clause 24 of the Bill provides for taxability of co-owners of the property
with definite and ascertainable shares.
Clause 25 of the Bill provides for interpretation relating to Chapter IV-C
and definition of an “owner” in relation to a property.
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to provide charging of income-tax on income
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”. It further seeks to
provide inclusive definition of income under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession”.
Clause 27 of the Bill provides for the manner of computing income under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
Clause 28 of the Bill provides for deduction for expenses on account of rent,
repairs, insurance premium, local taxes, etc.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to provide the deduction related to employee
welfare including contribution to various funds, etc., that need to be allowed while
computing the income under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”.
Clauses 30 to 32 of the Bill provides for deduction on expenditure incurred
towards insurance premium relating to destruction of stock, provision for bad
debts, written off, bonus, commission paid to employees, interest paid on
borrowed capital.
Clause 33 of the Bill provides for deduction in respect of tangible and
intangible assets owned and used for the purposes of business.
Clause 34 of the Bill provides for general conditions for allowing
expenditure (other than capital and personal expenditure) incurred wholly and
exclusively for the purposes of business or profession being carried on by
assessee.
Clauses 35 and 36 of the Bill provides for amounts not to be allowed while
computing the income under the head “Profit and gains of business or profession”.

570

Clause 37 of the Bill provides for certain deductions allowed on certain
expenditures which is to be made only on actual payment basis.
Clause 38 of the Bill provides for certain sums that are liable to be deemed
as profit and gains of business or profession where the sums have been earlier
allowed as expenditure or deduction for the purpose of computation of income.
Clause 39 of the Bill provides for certain definitions such as actual cost,
written down value, speculative transactions, etc.
Clause 40 of the Bill provides for special provision for computation of cost
of acquisition of certain assets.
Clause 41 of the Bill provides for written down value of depreciable asset
and, inter alia, provides certain definitions such as actual cost, written down value,
speculative transactions, etc.
Clauses 42 and 43 of the Bill provide for capitalising the impact of foreign
exchange fluctuation and taxation of foreign exchange fluctuation at the time of
acquisition of assets and payments therefor in foreign currency by appropriately
adding or reducing the quantum of variation in such liability. The said clauses
further provide for treating profits or loss on account of fluctuation in exchange rate.
Clause 44 of the Bill provides for amortisation of certain preliminary
expenses insured by specified businesses before commencement of such businesses.
Clause 45 of the Bill provides for deduction of certain capital expenditure
(other than cost of land) or revenue expenditure incurred for scientific research.
Clause 46 of the Bill provides for deduction of certain capital expenditure of
specified business incurred subject to fulfilment of certain conditions.
Clause 47 of the Bill provides for deduction of expenses incurred for
agricultural extension projects and skill development projects.
Clauses 48 and 49 of the Bill provide for tea development account, coffee
development account and rubber development account and Site Restoration Fund
which, inter alia, seek to deal with deduction of deposits in tea, coffee or rubber
development accounts by the assessee or site restoration account engaged in
prospecting or extracting or producing petroleum or natural gas or both.
Clause 50 of the Bill provides for deduction in the case of specified
associations for the interest and welfare of members of such association when there
is a shortfall in expenditure for the welfare of its members with reference to
contributions by its members.
Clause 51 of the Bill provides for amortisation of expenditure for prospecting
certain minerals.
Clause 52 of the Bill provides for amortisation of expenditure for
telecommunications services, amalgamation, demerger, scheme of voluntary
retirement, etc., and deductions for spectrum or license fee paid in the
telecommunication business.
Clause 53 of the Bill provides for full value of consideration for transfer of
assets other than capital assets in certain cases and for adoption of stamp duty value
as full value of consideration at the time of transfer of assets (other than capital
assets) in specific cases.

571

Clause 54 of the Bill provides for deduction of certain capital expenditure
expenses incurred in business of prospecting for mineral oils
Clause 55 of the Bill provides for the manner of computation of profits or
gains in cases of insurance business.
Clause 56 of the Bill provides for computation of interest income of
specified financial institutions.
Clause 57 of the Bill provides for revenue recognition for construction and
service contracts.
Clause 58 of the Bill provides for special provision for computing profits
and gains of business of profession on presumptive basis in case of certain
residents.
Clause 59 of the Bill provides for chargeability of royalty and fee for
technical services in hands of non-residents.
Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to provide the manner for computation for
allowing the deduction of head office expenditure in case of non-residents.
Clause 61 of the Bill provides for special provision for computation of
income on presumptive basis in respect of certain business activities of certain
non-residents
Clause 62 of the Bill provides for maintenance of books of accounts and
seeks to deal with maintenance of books of account.
Clause 63 of the Bill provides for tax audit and also provides for auditing of
books account by specified accountant under certain conditions.
Clause 64 of the Bill provides for facilitating payments in electronic modes.
Clause 65 of the Bill provides for special provision for computing
deductions in case of business reorganisation of co-operative banks.
Clause 66 of the Bill provides for interpretation of Chapter IV-D which
deals with various definitions related to income under the head “Profit and gains
of business or profession”.
Clause 67 of the Bill provides for capital gains and also seeks to provide the
chargeability of Income-tax under the head “Capital gains” for various kinds of
transfer of capital assets.
Clause 68 of the Bill provides for capital gains on distribution of assets by
companies in liquidation.
Clause 69 of the Bill provides for capital gains arising to shareholders or
holders of specified securities, when a company purchases its own shares or
specified securities.
Clause 70 of the Bill provides for delineation all the transactions which will
not be regarded as transfer of capital asset for taxation as capital gains.
Clause 71 of the Bill provides for conditions wherein exemption from
taxation as capital gains are withdrawn.
Clause 72 of the Bill provides for mode of computation of capital gains.
Clause 73 of the Bill provides for the cost of acquisition of the asset with
reference to certain modes of acquisition.

572

Clause 74 of the Bill provides for special provision for computation of
capital gains in case of depreciable assets. The said clause seeks to tabulate the
methodology for arriving at the cost of acquisition for different capital assets.
Clause 75 of the Bill provides for computation of capital gains with respect
to assets that are depreciable, as well as the provision for their cost of acquisition.
Clause 76 of the Bill provides for special provision for computation of
capital gains in case of Market Linked Debenture.
Clause 77 of the Bill provides for the computation of capital gains in the
scenario of a slump sale of a capital asset.
Clauses 78 and 79 of the Bill provide for special provision for full value of
consideration in certain cases and special provision for full value of consideration
for transfer of share other than quoted share, respectively.
Clause 80 of the Bill provides for the fair market value shall be deemed to
the full value of consideration as a result of transfer of a capital asset by an
assessee where the consideration is not ascertainable or cannot be determined.
Clause 81 of the Bill provides for advance money received regarding the
transfer of a capital asset.
Clause 82 of the Bill provides for the capital gains arising from profits on
sale of residential properties.
Clause 83 of the Bill provides for capital gains on transfer of land used for
agricultural purposes not to be charged in certain cases.
Clause 84 of the Bill provides for capital gains on compulsory acquisition of
lands and buildings not to be charged in certain cases.
Clause 85 of the Bill provides for capital gains not to be charged on
investment in certain specific bonds.
Clause 86 of the Bill provides for non-chargeability of capital gains in
specific scenarios of investment in residential house.
Clauses 87 and 88 of the Bill provide for exemption of capital gains on
transfer of assets in cases of shifting of industrial undertaking from urban area and
exemption of capital gains on transfer of assets in cases of shifting of industrial
undertaking from urban area to any Special Economic Zone.
Clause 89 of the Bill provides for scenarios for extension of time for
acquiring new assets or depositing or investing amounts, with respect to capital
gains.
Clause 90 of the Bill provides for meaning of “adjusted”, “cost of
improvement” and “cost of acquisition” and also seeks to delineate the meaning
of terms and expressions with respect to capital gains.
Clause 91 of the Bill provides for reference to Valuation Officer for
ascertaining the fair market value of a capital asset.
Clause 92 of the Bill provides for a non-exhaustive list of the incomes which
are chargeable to tax under the head “Income from other sources”.
Clause 93 of the Bill provides for deductions for eligible expenses for
computing the taxable income under the head “Income from other sources”.

573

Clause 94 of the Bill seeks to enumerate the deductions that are allowable
to be set off against incomes referred to in clause 92.
Clause 95 of the Bill seeks to propose that any benefit in cash or otherwise
obtained on account of remission or cessation of any liability, for which a
deduction has been allowed in an earlier year, shall be taxable in the year in which
the benefit has been obtained.
Clause 96 of the Bill seeks to provide that the income which is transferred
to any other person without the transfer of the assets from which such income
arises shall be clubbed in the income of the transferor but not the transferee
(person to whom such income has been transferred).
Clause 97 of the Bill seeks to propose that the provisions relating to the clubbing
of income in the hands of transferor and transferee in case where transfer of assets is
revocable and the transfer of assets is irrevocable for a specified period.
Clause 98 of the Bill provides for definitions of the expressions “Transfer”
and “revocable transfer”.
Clause 99 of the Bill provides for clubbing of income which means adding
or including the income of another person (mostly family members) to one’s own
income.
Clause 100 of the Bill provides for the tax liability of the person in respect
of the income which is included in the income of any other person.
Clause 101 of the Bill provides that in computing the total income of an
assessee, there shall be included all income on which no income-tax is payable
under sub-part 4 of part A of Chapter XVII.
Clause 102 of the Bill provides for the circumstances or conditions in which
any sum found credited in the books of account maintained by the assessee shall be
considered as unexplained credits and be included in the total income of the assessee.
Clause 103 of the Bill provides for unexplained investment. It also seeks to
provide the circumstances or conditions in which any investment made by the
assessee shall be deemed as unexplained investment and be included in the total
income of the assessee.
Clause 104 of the Bill provides for the circumstances or conditions in which
any asset owned by or belonging to the assessee shall be deemed as unexplained
asset and be included in the total income of the assessee.
Clause 105 of the Bill provides for the circumstances or conditions in which
any expenditure incurred by the assessee shall be deemed to be unexplained
expenditure and be included in the total income of the assessee.
Clause 106 of the Bill seeks to provide that where any amount is borrowed
on a hundi and other instruments like hundi from, or any amount due thereon is
repaid to, any person otherwise than through an account payee cheque drawn on
a bank, the amount so borrowed or repaid shall be deemed to be the income of the
person borrowing or repaying the amount.
Clause 107 of the Bill seeks to provide that income referred to in clauses 102,
103, 104, 105 and 106 shall be charged to tax as per the provisions of clause 195.
Clause 108 of the Bill provides for set off of losses under the same head of
income in the manner specified therein.

574

Clause 109 of the Bill provides for set off of losses under any other head of
income in the manner provided therein.
Clause 110 of the Bill provides for carry forward and set off of loss against
income from house property.
Clause 111 of the Bill provides for carry forward and set off of loss from
capital gains and seeks to provide for carry forward and set off of loss from capital
gains. The said clause further defines “unabsorbed capital loss” for this purpose.
Clause 112 of the Bill provides for carry forward and set off of business
loss. It further defines the expression “unabsorbed business loss”.
Clause 113 of the Bill provides for set off and carry forward of losses from
speculation business and provides for set off and carry forward of losses from
speculation business. It also defines the expressions “speculation business” and
“unabsorbed speculation business loss”.
Clause 114 of the Bill provides for set off and carry forward of losses from
specified business. The said clause also defines the expressions “specified
business” and “unabsorbed loss from the specified business”.
Clause 115 of the Bill seeks to provide for set off and carry forward of losses
from specified activity.
Clause 116 of the Bill seeks to provide for carry forward and set off of losses
and unabsorbed depreciation in case of specified business amalgamation.
Clause 117 of the Bill provides that in a case of amalgamation the
accumulated loss and depreciation of amalgamating entity shall be deemed to be
loss and depreciation of amalgamated entity specified therein.
Clause 118 of the Bill seeks to provide for carry forward and set off of losses
and unabsorbed depreciation in business reorganisation of co-operative banks.
Clause 119 of the Bill provides for carry forward and set off of losses not
permissible in certain cases and also provides that subject to certain conditions
specified therein, carry forward and set off of losses shall not be permissible in
cases including constitution of firm and on succession of a business or profession
by another person in such capacity or shall be permissible in case of change in
shareholding of a company.
Clause 120 of the Bill seeks to provide that no set off of loss or unabsorbed
depreciation shall be allowed against undisclosed income, consequent to search,
requisition and survey.
Clause 121 of the Bill provides for submission of return for losses and also
that no loss shall be carried forward and set off which has not been determined in
pursuance of a return filed.
Clause 122 of the Bill provides for the statutory compliance requirements,
time limits and overall limits for claiming the deductions enumerated in Chapter
VIII to eligible.
Clause 123 of the Bill provides for deduction for insurance premia, deferred
annuity, contributions to provident fund, etc. and to provide deduction to an
assessee being an individual or Hindu undivided family in respect of payments
made on account of insurance premia, deferred annuity, contribution to provident
fund etc. specified in the relevant proposed Schedule.

575

Clause 124 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of employer
contribution to pension scheme of Central Government.
Clause 125 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of
contribution to Agnipath Scheme.
Clause 126 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of health
insurance premia.
Clause 127 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of
maintenance including medical treatment of a dependant who is a person with
disability.
Clause 128 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of medical
treatment, etc.
Clause 129 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of interest
on loan taken for higher education.
Clause 130 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of interest
on loan taken for certain house property.
Clause 131 of the Bill provides for deduction in respect of interest on loan
taken for certain house property and to provide for deduction in respect of interest
on loan taken for certain house property in case of an individual to whom clause
130 is not applicable.
Clause 132 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of purchase
of electric vehicle.
Clause 133 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of donations
to certain funds, charitable institutions, etc.
Clause 134 of the Bill seeks to provide that deduction to an assessee being
an individual in respect of any expenditure incurred by him towards payment of
rent for any accommodation occupied by him for the purpose of his own
residence.
Clause 135 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of certain
donations for scientific research or rural development.
Clause 136 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of
contributions given by companies to political parties.
Clause 137 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of
contributions given by any person to political parties.
Clause 138 of the Bill seeks to provide for deductions in respect of profits
and gains from industrial undertakings or enterprises engaged in infrastructure
development, etc.
Clause 139 of the Bill seeks to provide for deductions in respect of profits
and gains by an undertaking or enterprise engaged in development of Special
Economic Zone.
Clause 140 of the Bill seeks to provide deduction to eligible start up in
respect of profits and gains of eligible businesses, which have high potential of
employment generation, subject to certain conditions specified therein.

576

Clause 141 of the Bill provides for deduction in respect of profits and gains
from certain industrial undertakings and provides for deduction for industrial
undertakings in North-eastern region and also in respect of undertakings
promoting housing projects.
Clause 142 of the Bill provides for deductions in respect of profits and gains
of business of developing and building housing projects.
Clause 143 of the Bill provides for special provisions in respect of profits
and gains of certain undertakings with respect to production of eligible article or
things in North-Eastern States.
Clause 144 of the Bill provides for deduction in respect of profits and gains
of newly established units in Special Economic Zones.
Clause 145 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction for businesses engaged
in collecting and processing of bio-degradable waste.
Clause 146 of the Bill provides for deduction in respect of additional
employee cost and deduction in respect of additional employee cost in certain
cases for specified period and shall be subject to conditions specified therein.
Clause 147 of the Bill provides for deductions for income of Offshore
Banking Units and Units of International Financial Services Centre. The said
clause also seeks to provide for deductions for income of Offshore Banking Units
and Units of International Financial Services Centre.
Clause 148 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of certain
inter-corporate dividends.
Clause 149 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of income
of co-operative societies.
Clause 150 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction in respect of certain
income of Producer Companies.
Clause 151 of the Bill provides for deduction in respect of royalty income,
etc., of authors of certain books other than text-books.
Clause 152 of the Bill provides for deduction in respect of royalty on patents.
Clause 153 of the Bill provides for certain deduction for interest on savings
account deposits (excluding time deposits) for individuals and Hindu undivided
families.
Clause 154 of the Bill provides for deduction in case of a person with
disability and to provide for deduction for an individual resident who is certified
by a medical authority as a person with disability or severe disability.
Clause 155 of the Bill seeks to provide for rebate to be allowed in computing
income-tax.
Clause 156 of the Bill seeks to provide for rebate of income-tax in case of
certain individuals.
Clause 157 of the Bill seeks to provide for relief when salary, etc, is paid in
arrears or in advance.
Clause 158 of the Bill seeks to provide for relief from taxation in income
from retirement benefit account maintained in a notified country.

577

Clause 159 of the Bill provides for agreement with foreign countries or
specified territories and adoption by the Central Government of agreement
between specified associations for double taxation relief. It also seeks to provide
for double taxation relief where the Central Government has entered into an
agreement with other countries. The said clause further provides for exchange of
information for the prevention of evasion, avoidance and recovery of income-tax.
Clause 160 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction from the Indian
income-tax payable by a person who has paid tax outside India in a country with
which no agreement exists in respect of his income which accrued or arose during
that tax year outside India.
Clause 161 of the Bill provides for computation of income from
international transaction and specified domestic transaction having regard to
arm’s length price.
Clause 162 of the Bill seeks to define the expression “associated enterprise”.
Clause 163 of the Bill seeks to define the expression “international transaction”.
Clause 164 of the Bill seeks to define the expression “specified domestic
transaction”.
Clause 165 of the Bill provides for determination of arm’s length price and
the methods for determining the arm’s length price.
Clause 166 of the Bill provides for referral of cases by the Assessing Officer
to the Transfer Pricing Officer for determining the arm’s length price.
Clause 167 of the Bill provides for power of Board to make safe harbour
rules to simplify compliance and reduce litigation.
Clause 168 of the Bill provides for advance pricing agreement between the
taxpayer and the tax authorities to pre-determine the arm’s length price for
specified transactions.
Clause 169 of the Bill, inter alia, seeks to provide for giving effect to
advance pricing agreement entered into by an assessee and consequential
procedures.
Clause 170 of the Bill provides for secondary adjustment in certain cases to
ensure that the actual allocation of profits between the associated enterprises
aligns with the arm’s length price.
Clause 171 of the Bill provides for maintenance, keeping and furnishing of
information and document by certain persons and documents by entities involved
in international or specified domestic transactions.
Clause 172 of the Bill provides for report from an accountant to be furnished
by persons entering into international transaction or specified domestic transaction.
Clause 173 of the Bill provides for definitions of certain terms relevant to
determination of arm’s length price, etc.
Clause 174 of the Bill provides for avoidance of income-tax by transactions
resulting in transfer of income to non-residents also that the income arising of
such transaction be deemed to be income.

578

Clause 175 of the Bill provides for avoidance of tax by certain transactions
in securities arising from such securities for such year shall be deemed to be the
income of persons specified therein.
Clause 176 of the Bill seeks to provide for special measures in respect of
transactions with persons located in notified jurisdictional area.
Clause 177 of the Bill seeks to provide for limitation on interest deduction
in certain cases.
Clause 178 of the Bill provides for the framework for the applicability of
General Anti-Avoidance Rule.
Clause 179 of the Bill seeks to define impermissible avoidance
arrangements under the General Anti-Avoidance Rule.
Clause 180 of the Bill seeks to outline the conditions under which an
arrangement shall be deemed to lack commercial substance.
Clause 181 of the Bill provides for consequences of impermissible
avoidance arrangement under the General Anti-Avoidance Rule.
Clause 182 of the Bill provides for treatment of connected person and
accommodating party under the General Anti-Avoidance Rule.
Clause 183 of the Bill seeks to provide for the applicability of General
Anti-Avoidance Rule.
Clause 184 of the Bill seeks to provide for definition of General
Anti-Avoidance Rule.
Clause 185 of the Bill seeks to provide, inter alia, for restrictions on taking
or accepting loan, deposit and specified sum in cash with certain exceptions.
Clause 186 of the Bill provides, inter alia, for restriction on receiving an amount
of rupees two lakh and above in the modes other than the modes specified therein.
Clause 187 of the Bill seeks to provide for accepting payment through
prescribed electronic modes.
Clause 188 of the Bill provides, inter alia, for restrictions on repayment of
certain loans, deposit or specified advance in cash with certain exceptions.
Clause 189 of the Bill seeks to provide for definitions of certain expressions
which, inter alia, includes banking company, specified sum, etc.
Clause 190 of the Bill provides for the mode of computation of total income
if it includes any income on which no income tax is payable.
Clause 191 of the Bill seeks to provide for tax on accumulated balance of
recognised provident fund.
Clause 192 of the Bill provides for the tax liability on the total income in
search cases.
Clause 193 of the Bill provides for, inter alia, for special rates of tax on
resident individuals employed by an entity engaged in a specified
knowledge-based industry or services on income from Global Depository
Receipts.

579

Clause 194 of the Bill provides for taxation of earnings from lotteries, cross
word puzzles, horse race, card games, online games, income from transfer of
virtual digital assets. The said clause further provides for a concessional tax rate
on royalty income on patents earned by a resident, income on transfer of carbon
credits and profits and gains from insurance business.
Clause 195 of the Bill provides for tax on certain income referred to in
clauses 102 to 106.
Clause 196 of the Bill provides for taxation of short-term capital gains in
case of a transfer of short-term capital asset, being an equity share in a company
or a unit of an equity-oriented fund or a unit of a business trust subject to certain
conditions.
Clause 197 of the Bill provides for taxation of long-term capital gains where
the capital gains arise from the transfer of a long-term capital asset (other than an
equity share in a company or a unit of an equity-oriented fund or a unit of a
business trust).
Clause 198 of the Bill provides for taxation of long-term capital gains where
the capital gains arise from the transfer of a long-term capital asset being an equity
share in a company or a unit of an equity-oriented fund or a unit of a business trust.
Clause 199 of the Bill provides for beneficial rate of tax on manufacturing
companies subject to satisfaction of certain conditions.
Clause 200 of the Bill provides for the (optional) concessional tax rate
applicable to companies other than those covered under clauses 199 and 201, if
they do not claim specific deductions. The said clause further provides for the
manner of opting, method of computing the income and also implications for Unit
in the International Financial Services Centre.
Clause 201 of the Bill provides for an incentivized tax rate on income of new
manufacturing domestic companies subject to satisfaction of certain conditions.
Clause 202 of the Bill provides for a simplified tax regime for individuals,
Hindu undivided families and other specified persons.
Clause 203 of the Bill provides for the (optional) concessional tax rate
applicable to co-operative societies other than those covered under clause 204, if
they do not claim specific deductions.
Clause 204 of the Bill provides for an incentivized tax rate of 15% on the
manufacturing income of new manufacturing co-operative societies subject to
satisfaction of certain conditions.
Clause 205 of the Bill provides for the conditions for the concessional rate
of taxes applicable under clauses 199, 200, 201, 203 and 204.
Clause 206 of the Bill provides for provisions relating to taxation on book
profits and deals with minimum alternate tax and alternate minimum tax.
Clause 207 of the Bill provides special rates of taxes for non-residents on
certain types of income (like dividends, interest, distributed income, income in
respect of units, royalties and fees for technical services).
Clause 208 of the Bill provides for special rates of taxes for offshore funds
on investments made in foreign currency.

580

Clause 209 of the Bill provides for special rates of taxes for non-residents
on Global Depository Receipts including income by way of interest, dividend and
income on transfer of such Global Depository Receipts.
Clause 210 of the Bill provides for special rates of tax on income earned by
Foreign Institutions Investors including dividend and interest on securities and
capital gains on transfer of their securities.
Clause 211 of the Bill provides for special rates of tax on non-residents
sportsmen or sports associations with respect to certain incomes earned in India.
Clause 212 of the Bill provides for Interpretation relating to Chapter XIII-E.
The said clause seeks to provide the definitions of certain terms for the purposes
of clauses 213 to 218.
Clause 213 of the Bill provides for the method of computing the taxable
income for non-resident Indians.
Clause 214 of the Bill provides for the special rates of taxes on investment
income and long terms capital gains earned by non-resident Indians.
Clause 215 of the Bill provides for the non-taxation of long term capital
gains earned by non-resident Indians, if they make specific investment(s).
Clause 216 of the Bill provides for the exemption from filing of the return
of income of non-resident Indians, if certain conditions are satisfied.
Clause 217 of the Bill provides for the optional grandfathering of the
taxation of income from investments made by a non-resident Indian if he becomes
a resident at a later year.
Clause 218 of the Bill provides for the method for opting out of the
provisions of the clauses 212 to 217.
Clause 219 of the Bill provides for relaxation from capital gains tax and
entitlement to carry forward losses, etc., when an Indian branch of a foreign bank
is converted into an Indian company.
Clause 220 of the Bill provides for the implications where a foreign
company is said to be a resident in India.
Clause 221 of the Bill provides for special taxation regime for income from
a securitization trust earned by its investors.
Clause 222 of the Bill seeks to provide for tax on income in case of venture
capital undertakings.
Clause 223 of the Bill provides for special taxation regime for Infrastructure
Investment Trust under the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Infrastructure
Investment Trusts) Regulations, 2014 and Real Estate Investment Trust under the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Real Estate Investment Trusts)
Regulations, 2014 and their unit holders.

581

Clause 224 of the Bill provides for special taxation regime for income of
investment fund and its unit holders.
Clause 225 of the Bill seeks to provide for income from the business of
operating qualifying ships and the option to tax payers to opt for the scheme of
tonnage tax.
Clause 226 of the Bill seeks to provide for tonnage tax scheme and defines
that a company operating ships and giving the manner of computation of income
under tonnage tax scheme for a tonnage tax company for its tonnage income.
Clause 227 of the Bill seeks to provide for computation of tonnage income.
Clause 228 of the Bill seeks to provide for relevant shipping income and
exclusion from book profit.
Clause 229 of the Bill provides for manner of calculation of depreciation
along with treatment of capital gains in case of the transfer of capital asset forming
part of qualifying assets as well as treatment given to the written down value of
the qualifying assets and other assets whenever they are moved between the
qualifying and non- qualifying businesses.
Clause 230 of the Bill seeks to provide for general exclusion of losses,
deductions and set off including the accrued losses incurred or claimed prior to
opting of tonnage tax scheme by the company.
Clause 231 of the Bill seeks to provide for the method of opting of tonnage
tax scheme and validity.
Clause 232 of the Bill seeks to provide for certain conditions for
applicability of tonnage tax scheme.
Clause 233 of the Bill seeks to provide for continuance of and validity of
the scheme in the case of amalgamation and demerger.
Clause 234 of the Bill seeks to provide for avoidance of tax and exclusion
from tonnage tax scheme in case of abuse of the provisions by way of any
arrangement made to avail tax advantage.
Clause 235 of the Bill provides for definition of certain terms relating to
tonnage tax scheme.
Clause 236 of the Bill provides for various classes of income-tax authorities
beginning from, the Central Board of Direct Taxes and up to Inspectors of
Income-tax.
Clause 237 of the Bill seeks to provide for the appointment of income-tax
authorities by the Central Government by framing rules and orders for regulating
conditions of service and to authorise the Board or subordinate authorities, to
appoint income-tax authorities below the rank of a Deputy or Assistant
Commissioner and also other executive or ministerial staff.
Clause 238 of the Bill provides for the income-tax authorities to be subordinate
to another income-tax authorities as per the notification issued by the Board.

582

Clause 239 of the Bill provides for the power of the Board to issue orders,
instructions and directions to other income-tax authorities.
Clause 240 of the Bill empowers the Board towards administration of
Charter for Taxpayers.
Clause 241 of the Bill provides for the power and performance of the
income-tax authorities in accordance with such directions as the Board may issue
or by other income-tax authorities as specified by the Board.
Clause 242 of the Bill provides for jurisdiction of Assessing Officers over
an area.
Clause 243 of the Bill provides for the power of the specified income-tax
authority to transfer any case from one Assessing Officer to another Assessing
Officer.
Clause 244 of the Bill provides for the jurisdiction of the succeeding
income-tax authority to continue with any proceeding from the stage at which his
predecessor has left.
Clause 245 of the Bill seeks to provide for the faceless jurisdiction of the
income-tax authorities who will exercise all powers and performance assigned
leading to greater efficiency, transparency and accountability among other things.
Clause 246 of the Bill seeks to provide for powers of income tax authorities
regarding discovery or production of evidence etc. as are vested in court under
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of specified matters.
Clause 247 of the Bill provides for dealing with powers and procedures
relating to search and seizure under the proposed legislation.
Clause 248 of the Bill provides for powers to requisition books of account,
etc., which have been taken into custody by any officer or authority under any
other law.
Clause 249 of the Bill provides for reasons for search and seizure not to be
disclosed.
Clause 250 of the Bill seeks to provide for application of seized or
requisitioned assets under the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 251 of the Bill seeks to provide for authority and procedures to deal
with books of accounts and documents seized or requisitioned under clauses 247
and 248 of the proposed legislation and provides time limitations for their retention
by the authorities concerned.
Clause 252 of the Bill provides for power to call for information of the
income-tax authorities to call for information.
Clause 253 of the Bill provides for powers of survey, i.e., entry into business
premises of an assessee, restrictions imposed in exercises of this power and duties
of the assesses during survey action.
Clause 254 of the Bill seeks to provide for powers of authorities to collect
certain information which may be useful, or relevant to the purposes of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 255 of the Bill seeks to provide for power to inspect registers of
companies by income-tax authorities.

583

Clause 256 of the Bill seeks to provide for the powers of Assessing Officer
under the proposed legislation in relation to making enquiries to competent
authority, i.e., higher authorities.
Clause 257 of the Bill provides to treat proceedings before the income-tax
authorities at par with the judicial proceedings.
Clause 258 of the Bill provides for restrictions on disclosure of information
in respect of assessees by income-tax authorities.
Clause 259 of the Bill provides the power of income-tax authority to call for
information by prescribed income-tax authority.
Clause 260 of the Bill empowers the Board to make any scheme by
notification for faceless collection of information under certain clauses.
Clause 261 of the Bill provides for definitions of various expressions used
in this Chapter XIV.
Clause 262 of the Bill seeks to provide for obtaining and quoting of
Permanent Account Number and linking of Aadhar Number to Permanent
Account Number.
Clause 263 of the Bill provides for obligation of persons to file return of
income and timelines for filing of return of income.
Clause 264 of the Bill seeks to provide for scheme for submission of return
through Tax Return Preparer.
Clause 265 of the Bill seeks to provide for verification of returns of income
by assessee and the persons competent to verify the returns of income.
Clause 266 of the Bill provides for payment of tax together with interest and fee
while filing return of income.
Clause 267 of the Bill provides for payment of self-assessment tax on
updated return along with the interest and fee payable.
Clause 268 of the Bill seeks to provide for inquiry before assessment, to call
for statement of all assets and liabilities and making a reference for special audit.
Clause 269 of the Bill seeks to provide for making a reference by Assessing
Officer to a Valuation Officer to estimate the fair market value of any asset,
property or investment.
Clause 270 of the Bill seeks to provide for processing of returns filed and the
powers to make prima facie adjustments and also selecting returns for the assessment.
Clause 271 of the Bill seeks to provide for completion of assessment to the
best of judgment of the assessing officer.
Clause 272 of the Bill empowers the Joint Commissioner to issue directions
to the assessing officer during assessment proceedings.
Clause 273 of the Bill seeks to provide for faceless assessment of eligible
cases assigned by National Faceless Assessment Centre to a specific Assessment
Unit through an automated allocation system.

584

Clause 274 of the Bill seeks to provide for making a reference by Assessing
Officer to the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner during the course of pending
assessments or reassessments to declare an arrangement as an impermissible tax
avoidance arrangement and determining the consequences of such an alignment.
Clause 275 of the Bill provides for scheme for reference to the Dispute
Resolution Panel.
Clause 276 of the Bill seeks to provide for method of accounting to be
followed for computation of income under the heads “Profits and gains of
business or profession” and “Income from Other sources”.
Clause 277 of the Bill seeks to provide for valuation of inventory and
securities as per income computation and disclosure standards.
Clause 278 of the Bill seeks to provide for taxability of interest,
compensation or enhanced compensation and escalation claims in respect of
contract or export incentives.
Clause 279 of the Bill seeks to provide for assessment of any income
chargeable to tax which has escaped assessment.
Clause 280 of the Bill seeks to provide for issue of notice where income has
escaped assessment.
Clause 281 of the Bill seeks to provide for procedure to be followed before
issuance of notice under clause 280.
Clause 282 of the Bill provides for time limit for notices in the cases of
income escaping assessment.
Clause 283 of the Bill seeks to provide provision for cases where assessment
is in pursuance of an order on appeal, directions from approving panel.
Clause 284 of the Bill provides for sanction for issue of notice in cases of
income escaping assessment.
Clause 285 of the Bill provides for other provisions pertaining to assessment
or re-assessment or re-computation made.
Clause 286 of the Bill provides for time limits for completion of assessment,
re-assessment and re-computation in various situations.
Clause 287 of the Bill provides for rectifying any mistake apparent on the
face of the record by amending orders passed by an income-tax Authority under
the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 288 of the Bill provides for time limits for passing of rectification
orders in certain cases.
Clause 289 of the Bill provides for notice of demand payable (tax, interest,
penalty, fine or any other sum).
Clause 290 of the Bill provides for modification and revision of demand
notice issued in certain cases.
Clause 291 of the Bill seeks to provide for intimation of loss the purposes
of carrying forward and set-off of such losses.
Clause 292 of the Bill provides for scheme of block assessment in a search case.
Clause 293 of the Bill provides for computation of total income of block
period in search cases.

585

Clause 294 of the Bill seeks to provide procedure for block assessment.
Clause 295 of the Bill seeks to provide for procedure for block assessment
of any other person in search cases.
Clause 296 of the Bill seeks to provide time limit for completion of block
assessment.
Clause 297 of the Bill seeks to provide that certain interests and penalties
not to be imposed in case of assessment of search cases.
Clause 298 of the Bill seeks to provide for levy of interest and penalty in
search cases.
Clause 299 of the Bill seeks to provide authorities competent to make
assessments of block period.
Clause 300 of the Bill provides for saving clause with respect to application
of other provisions of the Act.
Clause 301 of the Bill provides for interpretation of various expressions
related to assessment of search cases.
Clause 302 of the Bill provides for tax liability of the legal representative in
the event of the demise of the assessee.
Clause 303 of the Bill explains the concept of representative assessee for
the income of a non-resident or trust or minor, lunatic or idiot, etc.
Clause 304 of the Bill provides for the responsibility of the representative
assessee and taxation of income received in the capacity of representative assessee.
Clause 305 of the Bill deals with the rights of the representative assessee to
recover the taxes paid by him in his capacity as representative assessee.
Clause 306 of the Bill seeks to deal with persons to act as an agent in relation
to a non-resident.
Clause 307 of the Bill seeks to provide for the charge of tax of certain
representative assesses in a situation where the share of the beneficiaries is
unknown or indeterminate.
Clause 308 of the Bill provides for charge of tax in case of oral trust.
Clause 309 of the Bill seeks to provide for the method of computing a
member’s share in income of association of persons or body of individuals.
Clause 310 of the Bill deals with share of member of an association of
persons or body of individuals in income of association or body.
Clause 311 of the Bill seeks to provide for charge of tax in the hands of the
association of persons or body of individuals where shares of members in such
association or body is either known or unknown, represented in the form of a table.
Clause 312 of the Bill seeks to provide for the chargeability of tax on the income
of the estate of the deceased in the hands of the Executor and the right of the executor
to recover the tax paid.
Clause 313 of the Bill seeks to deal with the assessment of the income and the
taxability of the same pertaining to a business in which there is a succession otherwise
than a death.

586

Clause 314 of the Bill seeks to deal with effect of order of tribunal or court in
respect of business reorganisation in cases where either proceeding is pending or an
assessment is completed.
Clause 315 of the Bill seeks to deal with assessment of the income of a Hindu
undivided family where a partition has taken place and the joint and several liability
of the members of such family.
Clause 316 of the Bill provides for levy and recovery of tax in the case of any
ship, belonging to or chartered by a non-resident, which carries passengers, livestock,
mail or goods shipped at a port in India.
Clause 317 of the Bill provides for taxability of income of any individual who
may leave India.
Clause 318 of the Bill seeks to provide for the taxation of the income of
association of persons or body of individuals or artificial juridical person formed for
a particular event or purpose and likely to be dissolved soon after that event.
Clause 319 of the Bill provides for assessment of the income of persons who
are likely to transfer any property with a view to avoiding payment of any liability
under the proposed legislation.
Clause 320 of the Bill seeks to provide for accelerated assessment in cases of
discontinuance of business or profession in any year.
Clause 321 of the Bill seeks to provide for chargeability of any liability under
the proposed legislation in cases of discontinuance of business or profession or
dissolution of an association of persons.
Clause 322 of the Bill provides for the procedures to be followed by companies
in liquidation and the responsibilities of the liquidator
Clause 323 of the Bill seeks to provide for the liability of the directors of a
private company on tax and other dues as per the provisions of this Bill.
Clause 324 of the Bill seeks to provide for the charge of tax in case of a firm.
Clause 325 of the Bill deals with the provisions of assessment of a partnership
firm including compliances to certain conditions.
Clause 326 of the Bill deals with consequences in the assessment of a
partnership firm in case of non-compliance to the conditions made by rules.
Clause 327 of the Bill seeks to provide for assessment of a partnership firm in
cases where there is a change in constitution of the firm.
Clause 328 of the Bill provides for taxation in the hands of the predecessor and
successor in the case of succession of one firm by another firm.
Clause 329 of the Bill seeks to provide for joint and several liability of
partners for tax payable by firm.
Clause 330 of the Bill seeks to provide for assessment and liability in the
hands of the firm even after its dissolution or discontinuance of the business.
Clause 331 of the Bill provides for joint and several liability of partners of
a limited liability partnership in liquidation.
Clause 332 of the Bill provides for provisions related to registration of
non-profit organisation.

587

Clause 333 of the Bill seeks to provide provision related to switching over
of regimes by a registered non-profit organisation .
Clause 334 of the Bill seeks to provide taxability of income of a registered
non-profit organisation.
Clause 335 of the Bill provides the meaning of regular income of a
registered non-profit organisation .
Clause 336 of the Bill seeks to deal with the taxable regular income of a
registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 337 of the Bill provides for the provisions related to specified
income of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 338 of the Bill seeks to provide for the provisions related to income
not to be included in regular income of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 339 of the Bill provides for the meaning of corpus donation of a
registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 340 of the Bill provides for the provision related to deemed corpus
donation of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 341 of the Bill provides for the provision related to application of
income of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 342 of the Bill seeks to provide the provision related to accumulated
income of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 343 of the Bill provides for the provisions related to deemed
accumulated income of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 344 of the Bill seeks to provide for the provisions related to business
undertaking held as property of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 345 of the Bill seeks to provide the provision related to restriction
on commercial activities of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 346 of the Bill seeks to provide for the provisions relating to
restriction on commercial activities of a registered non-profit organisation which
has advancement of any other object of general public utility as any of its objects.
Clause 347 of the Bill provides for provision related to books of account of a
registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 348 of the Bill seeks to provide the provision related to audit of a
registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 349 of the Bill seeks to provide the provision related to return of
income of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 350 of the Bill seeks to provide provision related to permitted modes
of investment.
Clause 351 of the Bill seeks to provide provisions related to specified
violation of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 352 of the Bill seeks to provide provision related to tax on accreted
income of a registered non-profit organisation.

588

Clause 353 of the Bill seeks to provide provision related to other violations
of a registered non-profit organisation.
Clause 354 of the Bill seeks to provide provisions related to approval for
purpose of exemption on donation.
Clause 355 of the Bill seeks to provide the meaning of different terms used
in this Chapter.
Clause 356 of the Bill seeks to provide for appeals to Joint Commissioner
(Appeals) against certain orders.
Clause 357 of the Bill seeks to provide for appeals to Commissioner
(Appeals) against certain orders.
Clause 358 of the Bill seeks to provide for form of appeal and limitation.
Clause 359 of the Bill seeks to provide for procedure in appeal.
Clause 360 of the Bill deal with the powers of Joint Commissioner
(Appeals) and the Commissioner (Appeals).
Clause 361 of the Bill provides for constitution of Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 362 of the Bill seeks to provide for appeals to the Income tax
Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 363 of the Bill seeks to provide for the orders passed by the Income
tax Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 364 of the Bill seeks to provide for the powers and functions of the
Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 365 of the Bill seeks to provide for appeals to the High Court.
Clause 366 of the Bill provide for appeals to the High Court to be heard by
not less than two Judges.
Clause 367 of the Bill seeks to provide for appeals to Supreme Court.
Clause 368 of the Bill seeks to provide for hearing before the Supreme Court.
Clause 369 of the Bill seeks to provide that tax to be paid irrespective of
filing of appeal before High Court or Supreme Court.
Clause 370 of the Bill seeks to provide for execution for costs awarded by
Supreme Court.
Clause 371 of the Bill provides for amendment of assessment on account of
appeal in certain cases.
Clause 372 of the Bill seeks to provide for exclusion of time taken to obtain
copy of the order.
Clause 373 of the Bill seeks to provide for filing of appeals by income tax
authority and empowers Board to issue instructions from time to time.
Clause 374 of the Bill provides for the definition of “High Court” for the
purpose of filing of appeal under this Chapter.
Clause 375 of the Bill provides for procedure when assessee claims identical
question of law is pending before High Court or Supreme Court.

589

Clause 376 of the Bill seeks to prescribe procedure where an identical
question of law is pending before High Courts or Supreme Court.
Clause 377 of the Bill provides for revision of orders prejudicial to Revenue
by Principal Commissioner or Commissioner.
Clause 378 of the Bill seeks to provide for revision of orders in certain cases
which are not prejudicial to revenue.
Clause 379 of the Bill provides for constitution of Dispute Resolution
Committee to resolve disputes in certain cases.
Clause 380 of the Bill seeks to define certain expressions used in the context
of Advance Rulings.
Clause 381 of the Bill provides for constitution of Board for Advance Rulings.
Clause 382 of the Bill seeks to deal with proceedings in case of vacancies
in the Board for Advance Rulings.
Clause 383 of the Bill provides for filing of application before the Board for
Advance Rulings.
Clause 384 of the Bill seeks to provide for procedure to process the
application made for advance rulings.
Clause 385 of the Bill seeks to provide that certain authorities not to proceed
to decide in certain cases where application for advance ruling has been made.
Clause 386 of the Bill seeks to provide that advance ruling to be void in
certain circumstances.
Clause 387 of the Bill seeks to provide for powers of the Board for Advance
Rulings.
Clause 388 of the Bill seeks to empower the Board for Advance Rulings to
regulate its own procedure.
Clause 389 of the Bill provides for appeal to High Court on the rulings
pronounced by the Board for Advance Rulings.
Clause 390 of the Bill provides for the provisions relating to tax deduction at
source, tax collection at source, advance payment, etc., as modes of tax payment.
Clause 391 of the Bill provides for provisions relating to direct payment of
tax by assessee in certain conditions.
Clause 392 of the Bill provides for provisions relating to tax deduction at
source on salary and accumulated balance to an employee.
Clause 393 of the Bill provides for provisions relating to tax deduction at
source on various payments.
Clause 394 of the Bill provides for provisions relating to tax collection at
source on various transactions.
Clause 395 of the Bill provides for provisions relating to issuance of
certificate for lower deduction of tax.
Clause 396 of the Bill seeks to provide the certain sums which shall be
deemed as income received for the purposes of computing the income of the
assessee.

590

Clause 397 of the Bill seeks to provide for compliance and reporting
requirements for tax deduction at source and tax collection at source.
Clause 398 of the Bill seeks to provide for consequence for failure to deduct
or collect or pay tax.
Clause 399 of the Bill seeks to provide for processing of statements of tax
deduction at source and tax collection at source filed.
Clause 400 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to relax the
provisions of tax deduction at source and tax collection at source.
Clause 401 of the Bill seeks to provide for provisions relating to bar against
the demand on assessee to the extent tax has been deducted.
Clause 402 of the Bill seeks to provides for definition of certain expressions
used in the chapter of collection and recovery of tax.
Clause 403 of the Bill seeks to provide for liability for payment of advance
tax during the tax year in respect of total income of an assessee.
Clause 404 of the Bill seeks to provide for conditions where assessee shall
be required to pay advance tax.
Clause 405 of the Bill seeks to provides for the provisions relating to the
method for computation of advance tax payable in a tax year.
Clause 406 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of advance tax by
assessee on his own accord.
Clause 407 of the Bill provides for payment of advance tax by an assessee
in pursuance of an order of the Assessing Officer.
Clause 408 of the Bill provides for payment of advance tax in four
instalments and by the due dates as made by the rules.
Clause 409 of the Bill seeks to provide for deeming an assessee to be in
default for failure to pay advance tax as per the order of the Assessing Officer.
Clause 410 of the Bill seeks to provide for giving credit for advance tax paid
by or recovered from an assessee as a payment of tax in respect of the income of
the tax year.
Clause 411 of the Bill seeks to provide for the provisions relating to notice
of demand, tax payable and when assessee is deemed to be in default.
Clause 412 of the Bill seeks to provide for penalty which shall be payable
when assessee is in tax default.
Clause 413 of the Bill seeks to provide for drawing up of a certificate in
respect of an assessee in default by the Tax Recovery Officer, specifying the
amount of arrears due from the assessee and the recovery thereof.
Clause 414 of the Bill seeks to specify the Tax Recovery Officer by whom
recovery is to be effected.
Clause 415 of the Bill empowers the Tax Recovery Officer to stay the
recovery proceedings of his own accord or in pursuance of reduction in demand
because of an appeal or other proceedings under the proposed legislation.

591

Clause 416 of the Bill empowers the Assessing Officer with modes of
recovery where no certificate is drawn up by the Tax Recovery Officer.
Clause 417 of the Bill provides for recovery of tax through State
Government in any area where recovery of tax has been entrusted to a State
Government under article 258(1) of the Constitution.
Clause 418 of the Bill provides for recovery of tax on behalf of the
Government of any foreign country under an agreement between the two
Governments from a resident of India or a person having any property in India
through a Tax Recovery Officer.
Clause 419 of the Bill provides for the provisions relating to recovery of penalties,
fine, interest and other sums in the same manner as provided for recovery of tax.
Clause 420 of the Bill seeks to provide for the requirement of a no objection
certificate to be issued by the prescribed authority to a person who is not domiciled
in India and has come to India in connection with business, profession or
employment and who has income derived from any source in India for leaving India.
Clause 421 of the Bill seeks to provide that recovery by suit or under other
law will not be affected notwithstanding tax due being recovered under any mode
prescribed in the proposed legislation.
Clause 422 of the Bill seeks to provide for recovery of tax arrears from a
non-resident from his assets.
Clause 423 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall be liable to
pay interest for default in furnishing return of income.
Clause 424 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall be liable to
pay interest for failure to pay advance tax or where the advance tax paid by the
assessee falls short of 90% of the assessed tax.
Clause 425 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall be liable to
pay interest for failure to pay full amount of any instalment of advance tax by the
due date for that instalment.
Clause 426 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall be liable to
pay interest on any amount refunded to him in excess of the refund actually due.
Clause 427 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall be liable to
pay fee of for delay in furnishing of statement regarding taxes deducted or
collected at source.
Clause 428 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall be liable to
pay a fee for failure to furnish a return of income by the prescribed due date.
Clause 429 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall be liable to
pay a fee of for delay in furnishing of prescribed statement or certificate relating
to expenditure on scientific research and by an institution or fund established in
India for charitable purposes.
Clause 430 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall be liable to
pay a fee for failure to intimate his Aadhaar number by the prescribed date.
Clause 431 of the Bill provides for refund of excess amount paid by an
assessee where the tax paid is more than the tax actually chargeable.

592

Clause 432 of the Bill provides that the legal representative or the trustee or
guardian or receiver, to claim or receive refund for the benefit of a person who is
unable to claim or receive the refund due to him on account of death, incapacity,
insolvency, liquidation or other cause or his estate.
Clause 433 of the Bill seeks to provide that every claim of refund shall be
made by furnishing a return of income.
Clause 434 of the Bill seeks to provide for refund of tax deducted and paid
to the Central Government by a person by whom the income is payable and who
was required by an agreement to bear such tax deductible on the income on a
claim made by him that no tax was required to be deducted on such income.
Clause 435 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Assessing Officer shall
refund any amount becoming due to the assessee as a result of any appellate order
without the assessee being required to make any claim in this regard.
Clause 436 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall not be entitled
to question the correctness of any assessment or other matter which has become
final or to claim any other relief except refund of tax wrongly paid or paid in
excess.
Clause 437 of the Bill seeks to provide that the assessee shall be entitled to
receive interest in addition to the refund due to him.
Clause 438 of the Bill seeks to provide for setting off the amount to be
refunded or any part of that amount, against any sum remaining payable under
this Bill by such person after giving prior intimation to such person.
Clause 439 of the Bill seeks to impose penalty for under-reporting and misreporting of income.
Clause 440 of the Bill deals with the conditions and circumstances under
which immunity from imposition of penalty and initiation of prosecution
proceedings.
Clause 441 of the Bill seeks to impose penalty for failure to keep, maintain
or retain books of account, documents, etc.
Clause 442 of the Bill seeks to impose penalty for failure to keep and
maintain information and document, etc., in respect of certain transactions.
Clause 443 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty, if the
income which includes any cash credits, unexplained investment, unexplained
money, unexplained expenditure, amount of investment, etc., not fully disclosed
in books of account and amount borrowed or repaid on hundi.
Clause 444 of the Bill seeks to impose penalty for false entry or omitted
entry in the books of account.
Clause 445 of the Bill seeks to impose penalty for violation of certain
provisions by specified persons.
Clause 446 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to get accounts audited.

593

Clause 447 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to furnish a report from an accountant as required by clause 172.
Clause 448 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to deduct tax at source.
Clause 449 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to collect tax at source.
Clause 450 of the Bill provides for imposition of penalty if a person takes
or accepts any loan or deposit or specified sum in contravention of the provisions
of clause 185.
Clause 451 of the Bill provides for imposition of penalty for failure to
comply with the provisions of clause 186.
Clause 452 of the Bill provides for imposition of penalty for failure to
comply with the provisions of clause 187.
Clause 453 of the Bill provides for imposition of penalty for failure to
comply with the provision of clause 188.
Clause 454 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to furnish statement of financial transaction or reportable account.
Clause 455 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for
furnishing inaccurate statement of financial transaction or reportable account.
Clause 456 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to furnish statement or information or document by an eligible investment fund.
Clause 457 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to furnish statement or information or document under clause 171.
Clause 458 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to furnish information or document under clause 506.
Clause 459 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to furnish report or for furnishing inaccurate report under clause 511.
Clause 460 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to submit statement under clause 505.
Clause 461 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to submit statement as required under clause 397(3)(b).
Clause 462 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to furnish information or furnishing inaccurate information as required under
clause 397(3)(d).
Clause 463 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for
furnishing incorrect information in reports or certificates by any accountant or
merchant banker or registered valuer.
Clause 464 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to furnish statements by certain institutions or funds.
Clause 465 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to answer questions, sign statements, furnish information, returns or statements,
allow inspections, etc.

594

Clause 466 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to comply with the provisions of clause 254.
Clause 467 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to comply with the provisions of clause 262.
Clause 468 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalty for failure
to comply with the provisions of clause 397(1).
Clause 469 of the Bill seeks to provide for power to reduce or waive penalty,
etc., in certain cases.
Clause 470 of the Bill seeks to provide that penalty in certain cases shall not
be imposed for reasonable cause.
Clause 471 of the Bill seeks to provide for the procedure for levy of penalty.
Clause 472 of the Bill provides for bar of limitation for imposing penalty.
Clause 473 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for contravention of
order passed under clause 247 (1)(viii) or (4).
Clause 474 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for failure to comply
with clause 247 (1)(b)(ii).
Clause 475 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for the removal,
concealment, transfer or delivery of property to evade tax recovery.
Clause 476 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for failure to pay tax
to the credit of Central Government as required under Chapter XIX-B.
Clause 477 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for failure to pay
collected tax to the credit of Central Government.
Clause 478 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for wilful attempt to
evade tax, penalty, etc.
Clause 479 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for failure to furnish
return of income.
Clause 480 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for failure to furnish
return of income in search cases.
Clause 481 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for failure to produce
accounts and documents.
Clause 482 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for making of false
statement in verification, etc.
Clause 483 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for falsification of
books of account or document, etc., to evade tax.
Clause 484 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for abetment of false
return, etc.
Clause 485 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for second and
subsequent offences.
Clause 486 of the Bill seeks to provide for that punishment shall not be
imposed in certain cases for reasonable cause.
Clause 487 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for offences by
companies.

595

Clause 488 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishment for Hindu undivided
family.
Clause 489 of the Bill seeks to provide for presumption as to assets, book
of accounts, etc., in certain cases.
Clause 490 of the Bill seeks to provide for presumption as to culpable
mental state.
Clause 491 of the Bill seeks to provide for previous sanction of the Commissioner
or Principal Commissioner or Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner
(Appeals) or Principal Chief Commissioner to launch prosecution of certain offences.
Clause 492 of the Bill seeks to provide for certain offences to be noncognizable irrespective of the provisions contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
Clause 493 of the Bill seeks to provide that entries in the records or other
documents in the custody of an income-tax authority shall be admitted in evidence
in any proceedings for the prosecution of any person for an offence.
Clause 494 of the Bill provides for punishment for contravention of
clause 258(3) relating to disclosure of information by public servants.
Clause 495 of the Bill seeks to provide for trial of offences under the Bill
by special Court.
Clause 496 of the Bill seeks to provide for trial of offences under the Bill
by special Court irrespective of the provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023.
Clause 497 of the Bill seeks to provide for trial of offences as summons case.
Clause 498 of the Bill seeks to provide for application of the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 to proceedings before Special Court.
Clause 499 of the Bill seeks to provide that transfers of assets shall be void
as against any claim in respect of any tax payable by the assessee as a result of
the completion of the pending proceeding or otherwise.
Clause 500 of the Bill empowers the Assessing Officer to provisionally attach
any property belonging to the assessee during the pendency of an assessment,
reassessment or penalty proceeding, to protect the interests of the revenue.
Clause 501 of the Bill seeks to provide mode of service of a notice, summon,
requisition, order or any other communication.
Clause 502 of the Bill provides for manner of authentication of a notice or
other document shall be issued by any income-tax authority.
Clause 503 of the Bill seeks to provide for service of notice on partition of
a Hindu undivided family or on dissolution of a firm.
Clause 504 of the Bill seeks to provide for service of notice to be made in
the case of a discontinued business or profession.
Clause 505 of the Bill provides for submission of statement a non-resident,
having a liaison office in India set up as per the guidelines issued by the Reserve
Bank of India under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.

596

Clause 506 of the Bill seeks to provide for furnishing information or documents
by an Indian concern in certain cases to the prescribed income-tax authority.
Clause 507 of the Bill seeks to provide for submission of statements by
persons carrying on the production of a cinematograph film or engaged in any
specified activity.
Clause 508 of the Bill seeks to provide for furnishing of statement by a
prescribed reporting financial institution in respect of a specified financial
transaction or reportable account to the prescribed income-tax authority.
Clause 509 of the Bill seeks to provide for furnishing of information in
respect of a transaction of a crypto-asset.
Clause 510 of the Bill seeks to provide that the prescribed income-tax
authority or the person authorised by such authority shall provide an annual
information statement in the prescribed manner.
Clause 511 of the Bill seeks to provide for furnishing of reports in respect
of international group.
Clause 512 of the Bill seeks to provide for publication of information in
respect of proceedings or prosecution in certain cases.
Clause 513 of the Bill seeks to provide that any assessee who is entitled or
required to attend before any income-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in
connection with any proceeding relating to valuation of any asset may be
represented by a registered valuer.
Clause 514 of the Bill seeks to provide for the procedure for registration of
valuers.
Clause 515 of the Bill seeks to provide that an assessee, entitled or required
to attend before an income-tax authority or Appellate Tribunal for any proceeding
under this Bill, may attend through an authorised representative.
Clause 516 of the Bill seeks to provide for rounding off of amount of total
income, or tax payable or payable or refundable.
Clause 517 of the Bill seeks to provide that a receipt shall be given for any
money paid or recovered under this Bill.
Clause 518 of the Bill seeks to provide that every person deducting, retaining,
or paying any tax in pursuance of this clause in respect of an income belonging to
another person shall be indemnified for the deduction, retention, or payment thereof.
Clause 519 of the Bill seeks to provide for the power to tender immunity
from prosecution to the Central Government.
Clause 520 of the Bill provides that no court inferior to that of a Judicial
Magistrate of First Class shall try any offence under this Bill.
Clause 521 of the Bill seeks to provide for the barring of the application of
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 and section 401 of the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 to persons convicted under the Bill who are not under the
age of 18 years.

597

Clause 522 of the Bill seeks to that no return of income, assessment, notice,
summons or other proceeding shall be invalid merely by reason of any mistake,
defect or omission.
Clause 523 of the Bill seeks to provide that where an assessee has appeared
in any proceeding or cooperated in any inquiry related to an assessment or
reassessment, it shall be deemed that any notice has been duly served upon him.
Clause 524 of the Bill provides for a rebuttable presumption with respect to
books of account, other documents, money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable
article or thing found in the possession or control of any person in the course of a
search or survey.
Clause 525 of the Bill seeks to provide for authorisation and assessment in
case of search or requisition.
Clause 526 of the Bill seeks to provide for bar of suits in civil courts in
relation to proceedings under the Bill.
Clause 527 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make
exemption, etc., in relation to participation in business of prospecting for,
extraction, etc., of mineral oils.
Clause 528 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government or Board
to condone delays in obtaining approval.
Clause 529 of the Bill seeks to specify for withdrawal of approval where
Central Government or Board have the power to grant any such approval.
Clause 530 of the Bill seeks to provide for effectivity for charge of tax in
case of pending legislative provision.
Clause 531 of the Bill seeks to provide for rescinding exemption in relation
to certain Union territories already granted.
Clause 532 of the Bill seeks to empower the Board, subject to the control of
the Central Government, to make Schemes.
Clause 533 of the Bill seeks to empower the Board, subject to the control of
the Central Government, to make rules.
Clause 534 of the Bill seeks to provide for laying of rules and certain
notifications before Parliament.
Clause 535 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to remove
difficulties.
Clause 536 of the Bill seeks to provide for repeal of the Income-tax
Act, 1961 and saving of certain actions taken thereunder.

598

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
This Bill seeks to repeal the Income-tax Act, 1961 and re-enact the proposed
legislation so that no additional expenditure of significance, apart from what is
being spent on the administration of the said Act, is contemplated by reason
merely of passing of this Bill.

598

599

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
The provisions of the Bill, inter alia, empower the Central Government to
issue notifications and the Board to make rules and issue guidelines for various
purposes as specified therein.
2. Sub-clause (4) of clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Board to issue
guidelines with the prior approval of the Central Government for removing any
difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of the said clause and
clause 67(10).
3. Sub-clause (15) of clause 166 of the Bill empowers the Board to issue
guidelines with the prior approval of the Central Government for removing any
difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of the sub-clauses (9) and (12) of
the said clause.
4. Sub-clause (2) of clause 205 of the Bill empowers the Board to issue
guidelines with the prior approval of the Central Government for removing any
difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of the item (b) or (c) or (d) of the
said sub-clause.
5. Sub-clause (8) of clause 267 of the Bill empowers the Board to issue
guidelines with the prior approval of the Central Government for removing any
difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of the said clause.
6. The Bill seeks to make provisions to lay the guidelines referred to in
paragraphs 2 to 5 above shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each
House of Parliament.
7. Clause 533 of the Bill empowers the Board to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the proposed legislation, subject to the control of the Central
Government. It, inter alia, seeks to empower the Board to make rules for (a) the
ascertainment and determination of any class of income; (b) the manner in which
and the procedure by which the income shall be arrived at in the case of (i) income
derived in part from agriculture and in part from business; (ii) persons residing
outside India; (iii) operations carried out in India by a non-resident; (iv) transactions
or activities of a non-resident; (v) an individual who is liable to be assessed under
clause 99(3) and (4); (c) the determination of the value of any perquisite chargeable
to tax under the proposed legislation in such manner and on such basis as appears
to the Board to be proper and reasonable; (d) the percentage on the written down
value which may be allowed as depreciation for buildings, machinery, plant or
furniture; (e) the matters specified in clause 62; (f) the conditions or limitations
subject to which any payment of rent made by an assessee shall be deducted under
clause 134; (g) the matters specified in Chapter XI; (h) the time within which any
person may apply for the allotment of a Permanent Account Number, the form and
the manner in which such application may be made and the particulars which such
application shall contain and the transactions with respect to which Permanent
Account Number shall be quoted on documents relating to such transactions under
clause 262; (i) the documents, statements, receipts, certificates or audited reports
which may not be furnished along with the return but shall be produced before the
Assessing Officer on demand under clause 263 (2)(a); (j) the class or classes of
persons who shall be required to furnish the return of income in electronic form; the
form and the manner of furnishing the said return in electronic form; documents,
statements, receipts, certificates or reports which shall not be furnished with the
return in electronic form and the computer resource or electronic record to which
such return may be transmitted under clause 263 (2)(a); (k) the cases, the nature and
value of assets, the limits and heads of expenditure and the outgoings, which are
required to be prescribed under clause 263(2)(b); (l) the form of the report of audit
or inventory valuation and the particulars which such report shall contain under
clause 268(5); (m) remuneration of Chairperson and members of the Approving
Panel under clause 274(21) and procedure and manner for constitution of, functioning
599

600

and disposal of references by, the Approving Panel under clause 274(24); (n) the
form and manner in which the information relating to payment of any sum may be
furnished under clause 397(3)(d); (o) the authority to be prescribed for any of the
purposes of the proposed legislation; (p) the procedure for giving effect to any
agreement for the granting of relief in respect of double taxation or for the avoidance
of double taxation entered into by the Central Government under the proposed
legislation; (q) the procedure for granting of relief or deduction, of any income-tax
paid in any country or specified territory outside India, under clause 159 or 160,
against the income-tax payable under the proposed legislation; (r) the form and
manner in which any application, claim, return or information may be made or
furnished and the fees that may be levied in respect of any application or claim; (s)
the manner in which any document required to be filed under the proposed
legislation may be verified; (t) the procedure to be followed on applications for
refunds; (u) the procedure for calculating interest payable by assessees or by the
Government to assessees under the proposed legislation, including the rounding off
of periods when a fraction of a month is involved, and specifying the circumstances
under which and the extent to which petty amounts of interest payable by assessees
may be ignored; (v) the regulation of any matter for which provision is made in
clause 420; (w) the form and manner in which any appeal or cross-objection may be
filed under the proposed legislation, the fee payable in respect thereof and the
manner in which intimation referred to in clause 358 (3)(b) may be served; (x) the
circumstances, conditions and the manner in which, the Joint Commissioner
(Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) may permit an appellant to produce
evidence which he did not produce or which he was not allowed to produce before
the Assessing Officer; (y) the form in which the statement under clause 507 shall be
delivered to the Assessing Officer; (z) the maintenance of a register of persons other
than legal practitioners or accountants practising before income-tax authorities and
for the constitution of and the procedure to be followed by the authority referred to
in clause 515(5); (za) the issue of certificate verifying the payment of tax by
assessees; and (zb) any other matter which is to be provided by rules under the
proposed legislation.
8. Sub-clause (3) of clause 535 of the Bill seeks to provide that every removal
of difficulty order made under the said clause shall be laid, as soon as may be, after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
9. The conditions specified in the Note to Table:2.C of Schedule II, inter alia,
empowers the Board to issue guidelines with the prior approval of the Central
Government for removing any difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of
the said clause. The said clause further provides that the guidelines so issued shall
be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
10. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
procedure and details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA

————

A

BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to income-tax.

————

(Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs)

