147

(a) offers no explanation about the nature and source of acquisition of
such asset, or such excess amount, as the case may be; or
(b) the explanation offered by the assessee, is not satisfactory in the
opinion of the Assessing Officer,
5

then, the value of such asset, or such excess amount, as the case may be, shall be
deemed to be the income of the assessee of the tax year in which such asset has
been found to be owned by, or belonging to, the assessee.
(2) In this section, “asset” includes money, bullion, jewellery, virtual digital
asset or other valuable article.

10

105. (1) Where any expenditure has been incurred by the assessee in any tax
year, and––

Unexplained
expenditure.

(a) the assessee offers no explanation about the source of such
expenditure or part thereof; or
15

(b) the explanation offered by the assessee is not satisfactory in the
opinion of the Assessing Officer,
then, the amount covered by such expenditure or part thereof, shall be deemed to
be the income of the assessee for that tax year.
(2) Irrespective of any other provision of this Act, the amount deemed as
income in sub-section (1) shall not be allowed as a deduction under this Act.

20

106. (1) Where any amount (including interest thereof) is borrowed or repaid
through a negotiable instrument or a hundi, other than an account payee cheque, or
through any mode as specified by the Board in this behalf, the amount so borrowed
or repaid shall be deemed to be the income of the person borrowing or repaying,
as the case maybe, for the tax year in which the amount was borrowed or repaid.

25

(2) Where the amount borrowed under sub-section (1) has been deemed to be
the income of any person, such person shall not be liable to be assessed again in
respect of such amount under that sub-section on repayment of such amount.
107. Income referred to in sections 102, 103, 104, 105 and 106 shall be
charged to tax as per the provisions of section 195.

30

Amount
borrowed or
repaid through
negotiable
instrument,
hundi, etc.

Charge of tax.

CHAPTER VII
SET OFF, OR CARRY FORWARD AND SET OFF OF LOSSES

35

108. (1) Unless provided otherwise in this Act, for any tax year, if net result
of computation from any source under any head of income (other than “Capital
gains”) is a loss, then assessee shall be entitled to set off such loss against his
income from any other source under the same head for that tax year.

Set off of losses
under the same
head of income.

(2) Any loss, as a result of computation made under sections 72 to 90, for any
tax year, arising from transfer of a capital asset as arrived at under a similar
computation made for the tax year in respect of any other capital asset being,––
40

(a) a long-term capital asset, shall be set off only against gains, if any,
from transfer of another long-term capital asset; and
(b) a short-term capital asset, shall be set off against gains, if any, from
transfer of any capital asset.

45

109. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, for any tax year, if income
computed under any head of income (other than “Capital gains”) is a loss, such
loss shall be set off against income of the assessee under any other head, including
“Capital gains”, if any, assessable for that tax year, subject to the following
conditions:––

Set off of losses
under any other
head of income.

148
(a) loss under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”
shall not be set off against income chargeable under the head “Salaries”; and
(b) loss under the head “Income from house property” shall be set off
to the extent of two lakh rupees against income under any other head;
(2) For any tax year, the loss under the head “Capital gains” shall not be set
off against income under any other head.
Carry
forward and
set off of
loss from
house
property.

110. (1) The unabsorbed loss from house property for any tax year shall
be carried forward to the subsequent tax year, and shall be set off only against
income from house property, if any, computed for such subsequent tax year,
and so on.

10

(2) The unabsorbed loss from house property referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be carried forward to the following tax year, not being more than eight tax
years immediately succeeding the tax year in which such loss was first computed.
(3) In this section, “unabsorbed loss from house property” means, loss
computed under the head “Income from house property” for the tax year, which
has not been, or is not wholly, set off against income from any other head, under
section 107, for the said tax year.

Carry
forward and
set off of
loss from
Capital
gains.

5

111. (1) The unabsorbed capital loss for any tax year shall be carried forward
to the subsequent tax year and shall be set off in the manner provided in
sub-section (2).

15

20

(2) The unabsorbed capital loss arising from transfer of capital asset, being––
(a) a long-term capital asset, may be set off only against capital gains,
if any, from transfer of any other long-term capital asset during the
subsequent tax year and so on; and
(b) a short-term capital asset, shall be set off against capital gains, if
any, from transfer of any other capital asset during the subsequent tax year
and so on.
(3) The unabsorbed capital loss referred to in sub-section (1), shall be carried
forward to the following tax year, not being more than eight tax years immediately
succeeding the tax year in which such loss was first computed.

25

30

(4) In this section, “unabsorbed capital loss” means loss computed under the
head “Capital gains” for any tax year, which has not been, or is not wholly, set off
under section 108 for the said tax year.
Carry
forward and
set off of
business
loss.

112. (1) The unabsorbed business loss (other than loss from speculation
business) for any tax year shall be carried forward to the subsequent tax year and
shall be set off only against the profits and gains of business or profession, carried
on by him and assessable for that tax year, if any, computed for such subsequent
tax year, and so on.
(2) The unabsorbed business loss referred to in sub-section (1), shall be
carried forward to the following tax year, not being more than eight tax years
immediately succeeding the tax year in which such loss was first computed.

35

40

(3) The unabsorbed business loss referred to in sub-section (1) shall first be
allowed to be set off before allowing set off of any carried forward allowance under
section 33(11) or 45(7).
(4) In this section, “unabsorbed business loss” means, loss computed under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” (other than loss from
speculation business) for the tax year, which has not been, or is not wholly, set off
against income from any other head, under section 109 for the said tax year.

45

149

113. (1) Any loss computed from a speculation business carried on by the
assessee, during any tax year, shall be set off only against profits and gains, if any,
of another speculation business for the said tax year.
5

10

(2) The unabsorbed speculation business loss for any tax year shall be carried
forward to the subsequent tax year and shall be set off only against the profits and
gains of speculation business, if any, computed for such subsequent tax year, and
so on.

Set off and carry
forward of
losses from
speculation
business.

(3) The unabsorbed speculation business loss referred to in sub-section (2)
shall not be carried forward for more than four tax years immediately succeeding
the tax year in which such loss was first computed.
(4) The unabsorbed speculation business loss referred to in sub-section (2)
shall first be allowed to be set off before allowing set off of any carried forward
allowance under section 33(11) or 45(7).
(5) In this section,––

15

20

25

(a) where any part of the business of the assessee (being a company)
consist of purchase and sale of shares of other companies, then the assessee
shall be deemed to be carrying on a speculation business, to the extent to
which its business consists of purchase and sale of such shares;
(b) “unabsorbed speculation business loss” means any loss computed
in respect of a speculation business carried on by the assessee during the tax
year, which has not been, or is not wholly, set off against profits and gains,
if any, of another speculation business under sub-section (1) for the said tax
year.
(6) The provisions of sub-section (5)(a) shall not apply to an assessee, being
a company, if—
(a) its gross total income consists mainly of income which is chargeable
under the heads “Income from house property”, “Capital gains” or “Income
from other sources”; or

30

(b) its principal business is of trading in shares or banking or the
granting of loans and advances.
114. (1) Any loss computed from a specified business carried on by the
assessee, during any tax year, shall be set off only against profits and gains, if any,
of any other specified business for the said tax year.

35

(2) The unabsorbed loss from the specified business for any tax year shall be
carried forward to the subsequent tax year and shall be set off only against the
profits and gains of any specified business, if any, computed for such subsequent
tax year, and so on.
(3) In this section,––

40

(a) “specified business” means any specified business referred to in
section 46;

45

(b) “unabsorbed loss from the specified business” means, any loss
computed in respect of a specified business carried on by the assessee during
the tax year, which has not been, or is not wholly, set off against profits and
gains, if any, of another specified business under sub-section (1) for the said
tax year.

Set off and carry
forward of
losses from
specified
business.

150
Set off and
carry forward of
losses from
specified
activity.

115. (1) Any loss incurred by the assessee in the specified activity during
any tax year, shall not be set off against the income, if any, from any source other
than specified activity for the said tax year.
(2) The unabsorbed loss from the specified activity for any tax year shall be
carried forward to the subsequent tax year and shall be set off,––

5

(a) only against the income from specified activity, if any, computed
for such subsequent tax year, and so on; and
(b) only when the specified activity is carried on by the assessee in that
tax year.
(3) The unabsorbed loss from the specified activity referred to in
sub-section (2) shall not be carried forward for more than four tax years
immediately succeeding the tax year in which such loss was first computed.

10

(4) In this section,––
(a) “income by way of stake money” means the gross amount of prize
money received by the owner of race horses participating in horse races on
their winning a particular position in such race;
(b) “loss incurred by the assessee in the specified activity” means the
amount by which the income by way of stake money, if any, falls short of
the expenditure, not being capital expenditure, incurred wholly and
exclusively for maintaining race horses;

15

20

(c) “race horse” means a horse upon which wagering or betting may
be lawfully made in a horse race;
(d) “specified activity” means the activity of owning and maintaining
race horses;
(e) “unabsorbed loss from the specified activity” means any loss
computed in respect of the specified activity carried on by the assessee
during the tax year, which has not been, or is not wholly, set off against
income, if any, of the specified activity under sub-section (1) for the said tax
year.
Treatment of
accumulated
losses and
unabsorbed
depreciation in
amalgamation or
demerger, etc.

116. (1) Where there has been an amalgamation of,—

25

30

(a) a company owning an industrial undertaking or a ship or a hotel
with another company; or
(b) a banking company referred to in section 5(c) of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 with a specified bank; or
(c) one or more public sector company with one or more other public
sector company; or
(d) an erstwhile public sector company with one or more company or
companies, if the share purchase agreement entered into under strategic
disinvestment restricted immediate amalgamation of the said public sector
company and the amalgamation is carried out within five years from the end
of the tax year in which the restriction on amalgamation in the share
purchase agreement ends,
then, irrespective of anything in any other provision of this Act, the accumulated
loss and unabsorbed depreciation of the amalgamating company shall be deemed
to be the loss or, allowance for unabsorbed depreciation of the amalgamated
company for the tax year in which the amalgamation was effected, and other
provisions of this Act relating to set off and carry forward of loss and allowance
for depreciation shall apply accordingly.

10 of 1949.
35

40

45

151

5

(2) The accumulated loss and the unabsorbed depreciation of the
amalgamating company, in case of an amalgamation referred to in
sub-section (1)(d), which is deemed to be the loss or, as the case may be, the
unabsorbed depreciation of the amalgamated company, shall not exceed the
accumulated loss and unabsorbed depreciation of the public sector company as on
the date on which it ceases to be a public sector company due to such
strategic disinvestment.
(3) For sub-section 1(d),—

18 of 2013.

10

(a) “control” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 2(27) of the Companies Act, 2013;
(b) “erstwhile public sector company” means a company which was a
public sector company in earlier tax years and ceases to be so due to strategic
disinvestment by the Government;

15

(c) “strategic disinvestment” means sale of shareholding by the
Central Government or State Government or a public sector company, in a
public sector company or in a company, which results in—
(i) reduction of its shareholding to below 51%; and
(ii) transfer of control to the buyer;

20

(d) for clause(c)(i), the reduction of shareholding shall apply only
where shareholding of the Central Government or the State Government or
the public sector company exceeded 51% before the sale of shareholding;
(e) the transfer of control referred to in clause (c)(ii) may be effected
by the Central Government or the State Government or the public sector
company or any two or all of them.

25

(4) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1), the accumulated
loss shall not be set off or carried forward and the unabsorbed depreciation shall
not be allowed in the assessment of the amalgamated company unless,—
(a) the amalgamating company—

30

(i) has been engaged in the business, in which the accumulated
loss occurred or depreciation remains unabsorbed, for three or
more years;
(ii) has held continuously as on the date of the amalgamation, at
least three-fourths of the book value of fixed assets held by it two years
preceding the date of amalgamation;

35

(b) the amalgamated company—
(i) holds continuously for a minimum five years from the date of
amalgamation at least three-fourths of the book value of fixed assets
of the amalgamating company acquired in a scheme of amalgamation;

40

(ii) continues the business of the amalgamating company for a
minimum five years from the date of amalgamation;
(iii) fulfils such other conditions as prescribed to ensure the
revival of the business of the amalgamating company or to ensure that
the amalgamation is for genuine business purpose.

45

(5) If any of the conditions laid down in sub-section (4) are not complied
with, the set off of loss or allowance of depreciation made in any tax year in the
hands of the amalgamated company shall be treated as the income of the
amalgamated company chargeable to tax for the year in which the
non-compliance occurs.

152

(6) Irrespective of anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, in
the case of a demerger, the accumulated loss and the allowance for unabsorbed
depreciation of the demerged company shall,—
(a) if directly relatable to the undertakings transferred to the resulting
company, be allowed to be carried forward and set off in the hands of the
resulting company;

5

(b) if not directly relatable to the undertakings transferred to the
resulting company, be apportioned between the demerged company and the
resulting company in the same proportion in which the assets of the
undertakings have been retained by the demerged company and transferred
to the resulting company, and shall be allowed to be carried forward and set
off in the hands of the demerged company or the resulting company, as
applicable.

10

(7) The Central Government may, by notification, specify such conditions
to ensure that the demerger is for genuine business purposes.

15

(8) If there has been a business reorganisation where, a firm is succeeded
by a company fulfilling the conditions laid down in section 70(1)(zd) or a
proprietary concern is succeeded by a company fulfilling the conditions laid down
in section 70(1)(zf), then, irrespective of anything contained in this Act, the
accumulated loss and the unabsorbed depreciation of the predecessor firm or the
proprietary concern, shall be deemed to be the loss or allowance for depreciation
of the successor company for the tax year in which business reorganisation was
effected and other provisions of this Act relating to set off and carry forward of
loss and allowance for depreciation shall apply.

20

(9) If any of the conditions laid down in section 70(1)(zd) or (zf) are not
complied with, the set off of loss or allowance of depreciation made in any tax
year in the hands of the successor company, shall be deemed to be the income of
the company chargeable to tax in the year in which the non-compliance occurs.
(10) If there has been reorganisation of business whereby a private company
or unlisted public company is succeeded by a limited liability partnership
fulfilling the conditions laid down in section 70(1)(ze), then, irrespective of
anything contained in any other provision of this Act, the accumulated loss and
the unabsorbed depreciation of the predecessor company, shall be deemed to be
the loss or allowance for depreciation of the successor limited liability partnership
for the tax year in which business reorganisation was effected and other provisions
of this Act relating to set off and carry forward of loss and allowance for
depreciation shall apply accordingly.
(11) If any of the conditions laid down in section 70(1)(ze) are not complied
with, the set off of loss or allowance of depreciation made in any tax year in the
hands of the successor limited liability partnership, shall be deemed to be the
income of the limited liability partnership chargeable to tax in the year in which
the non-compliance occurs.
(12) For any amalgamation referred to in sub-section (1) or reorganisation
of business referred to in sub-section (8) or (10) effected on or after the
1st April, 2025, any loss forming part of the accumulated loss of the predecessor
entity, being—

25

30

35

40

45

(i) the amalgamating company; or
(ii) the firm or proprietary concern; or
(iii) the private company or unlisted public company,
as the case may be, which is deemed to be the loss of the successor entity, being—

50

153

(a) the amalgamated company; or
(b) the successor company; or
(c) the successor limited liability partnership,
5

as the case may be, shall be carried forward for not more than eight tax years
immediately succeeding the tax year for which such loss was first computed for
the original predecessor entity.
(13) In this section,—

10

15

(a) “accumulated loss” means so much of the loss of the predecessor
firm or the proprietary concern or the private company or unlisted public
company before conversion into limited liability partnership or the
amalgamating company or the demerged company, under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession” (excluding loss in a speculation
business) which would have been eligible for carry forward and set off to
such predecessor under section 112, had the reorganisation of business or
conversion or amalgamation or demerger not occurred.
(b) “industrial undertaking” means any undertaking which is
engaged in—
(i) the manufacture or processing of goods; or
(ii) the manufacture of computer software; or

20

25

(iii) the business of generation or distribution of electricity or
any other form of power; or
(iv) the business of providing telecommunication services,
whether basic or cellular, including radio paging, domestic satellite
service, network of trunking, broadband network and internet
services; or
(v) mining; or
(vi) the construction of ships, aircrafts or rail systems;

30

(c) “original predecessor entity” means predecessor entity in respect
of the first amalgamation for sub-section (1) or first business reorganisation
for sub-sections (8) and (10), as the case may be.

35

(d) “specified bank” means the State Bank of India constituted under
the State Bank of India Act, 1955 or a corresponding new bank constituted
under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970 or under section 3 of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980;

23 of 1955.
5 of 1970.
40 of 1980.

40

(e) “unabsorbed depreciation” means so much of the allowance for
depreciation of the predecessor firm or the proprietary concern or the private
company or unlisted public company before conversion into limited liability
partnership or the amalgamating company or the demerged company, which
remains to be allowed and which would have been allowed to such
predecessor under this Act, had the reorganisation of business or conversion
or amalgamation or demerger not occurred.
117. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 2(6)(a) to (c) or
section 116, where there has been an amalgamation of,—

45

10 of 1949.

(a) one or more banking company with—
(i) any other banking institution under a scheme sanctioned and
brought into force by the Central Government under section 45(7) of
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or

Treatment of
accumulated
losses and
unabsorbed
depreciation in
scheme of
amalgamation in
certain cases

154

(ii) any other banking institution or a company following a
strategic disinvestment, wherein the amalgamation occurs within five
years from the end of the tax year during which such disinvestment is
carried out; or
(b) one or more corresponding new bank or banks with any other
corresponding new bank under a scheme brought into force by the Central
Government under section 9 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 or under section 9 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, or
both; or

5

5 of 1970.
40 of 1980.
10

(c) one or more Government company or companies with any other
Government company under a scheme sanctioned and brought into force by
the Central Government under section 16 of the General Insurance Business
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972,
the accumulated loss and unabsorbed depreciation of such banking company or
companies or amalgamating corresponding new bank or banks or amalgamating
Government company or companies, shall be deemed to be the loss or, allowance
for depreciation of the banking institution or company or amalgamated
corresponding new bank or amalgamated Government company for the tax year
in which the scheme of amalgamation was brought into force and other provisions
of this Act relating to set off and carry forward of loss and allowance for
depreciation shall apply accordingly.
(2) Where any scheme of such amalgamation is brought into force on or
after the 1st April, 2025, any loss forming part of the accumulated loss of the
predecessor entity, being—

57 of 1972.
15

20

25

(i) the banking company or companies;
(ii) the amalgamating corresponding new bank or banks; or
(iii) the amalgamating Government company or companies,
as the case may be, which is deemed to be the loss of the successor entity, being—
(a) the banking institution or company; or

30

(b) the amalgamated corresponding new bank or banks; or
(c) the amalgamated Government company or companies,
as the case may be, shall be carried forward in the hands of the successor entity
for not more than eight tax years immediately succeeding the tax year for which
such loss was first computed for original predecessor entity.

35

(3) In this section,—
(a) “accumulated loss” means so much of the loss of the amalgamating
banking company or companies or amalgamating corresponding new bank
or banks or amalgamating Government company or companies under the
head “Profits and gains of business or profession” (excluding losses of a
speculation business) which such amalgamating company or companies
would have been entitled to carry forward and set off under section 112 had
the amalgamation not occurred;

40

(b) “banking company” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in section 5(c) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;

45 10 of 1949.

(c) “banking institution” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in section 45(15) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;

10 of 1949.

155
(d) “corresponding new bank” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 2(d) of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, or section 2(b) of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980;

5 of 1970.
40 of 1980.
5
57 of 1972.

18 of 2013.
10
57 of 1972.

(e) “general insurance business” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 3(g) of the General Insurance Business
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972;
(f) “Government company” means a Government company as defined
in section 2(45) of the Companies Act, 2013, engaged in the general
insurance business and established under section 4 or 5 or 16 of the General
Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972;
(g) “original predecessor entity” means predecessor entity in respect
of the first amalgamation;

15

(h) “strategic disinvestment” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 116(3)(c);

20

(i) “unabsorbed depreciation” means the allowance for depreciation of
the amalgamating banking company or companies or amalgamating
corresponding new bank or banks or amalgamating Government company
or companies which remains to be allowed and which would have been
allowed to such entity, had the amalgamation not occurred.

25

118. (1) In a case of a co-operative bank, where amalgamation takes place
during the tax year, the accumulated business loss and unabsorbed depreciation,
if any, of the predecessor co-operative bank, shall be allowed to be set off against
the income of the assessee, being a successor co-operative bank for that tax year,
as if the business reorganisation had not taken place and all other provisions of
this Act relating to set off and carry forward of loss and allowance for
depreciation, shall apply accordingly.
(2) In case of a co-operative bank where demerger takes place during the tax
year, and where the accumulated loss or unabsorbed depreciation––

30

35

40

(a) is directly relatable to the undertaking transferred, the whole of
such loss and depreciation shall be allowed to be carried forward and set off
against the income of the resulting co-operative bank; and
(b) is not directly relatable to the undertaking transferred, then such
loss and depreciation shall first be apportioned between the demerged
co-operative bank and the resulting co-operative bank in the same
proportion in which assets of the undertaking are distributed between the
demerged co-operative bank and the resulting co-operative bank, and be
allowed to be carried forward and set off against their respective incomes.
(3) The accumulated loss shall be carried forward only up to eight tax years
immediately succeeding the tax year in which such loss was first computed in the
hands of the predecessor-in-business.
(4) The provisions of this section shall apply, if—
(a) the predecessor co-operative bank—

45

(i) has been engaged in the business of banking for three or more
years; and
(ii) has held at least three-fourths of the book value of fixed
assets as on the date of the business reorganisation, continuously for
two years before to the date of business reorganisation;

Carry forward
and set off of
losses and
unabsorbed
depreciation in
business
reorganisation
of co-operative
banks.

156

(b) the successor co-operative bank,—
(i) holds at least three-fourths of the book value of fixed assets
of the predecessor co-operative bank acquired through business
reorganisation, continuously for a minimum five years immediately
succeeding the date of business reorganisation;

5

(ii) continues the business of the predecessor co-operative bank
for a minimum five years from the date of business reorganisation; and
(iii) fulfils such other conditions, as prescribed, to ensure the
revival of the business of the predecessor co-operative bank or to
ensure that the business reorganisation is for genuine business
purpose.

10

(5) The Central Government may, by notification, specify such other
conditions as it may consider necessary, other than the condition referred to in
sub-section (4)(b)(iii), for the purposes of ensuring that the specified business
reorganisation is for genuine business purposes.

15

(6) In a case where any of the conditions referred to in sub-section (4) or (5)
are not complied with, the set off of accumulated business loss or unabsorbed
depreciation made in any tax year in the hands of the successor co-operative bank
shall be deemed to be the income of the successor co-operative bank chargeable
to tax for the year in which such conditions are not complied with.

20

(7) The period commencing from the beginning of the tax year and ending
on the date immediately preceding the date of business reorganisation, and the
period commencing from the date of such business reorganisation and ending with
the tax year, shall be deemed to be two different tax years for the purposes of
set off and carry forward of loss and allowance for depreciation.

25

(8) In this section,––
(a) “accumulated business loss” means so much of the loss of
amalgamating co-operative bank or demerged co-operative bank as referred
to in section 112 in the hands of predecessor co-operative bank, which such
predecessor co-operative bank would have been entitled to carry forward
and set off under the said section, as if the business reorganisation had not
taken place;
(b) “amalgamated co-operative bank”, “amalgamating co-operative
bank”, “amalgamation”, “business reorganisation”, “demerged co-operative
bank”, “demerger”, “predecessor co-operative bank”, “successor
co-operative bank” and “resulting co-operative bank” shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in section 65;
(c) “unabsorbed depreciation” means so much of the allowance for
depreciation in the hands of amalgamating co-operative bank or demerged
co-operative bank, which remains to be allowed and which would have been
allowed to such banks, if the business reorganisation had not taken place.
Carry forward
and set off of
losses not
permissible in
certain cases.

119. (1) In case of change in constitution of a firm during a tax year, such
firm shall not be entitled to carry forward and set off so much of the loss
proportionate to the share of retired or deceased partner as reduced by his share
of profit, if any, from the firm for that tax year.
(2) If any person carrying on any business or profession has been succeeded
in such capacity by another person, otherwise than by inheritance, nothing in this
Chapter shall entitle any person other than the person incurring the loss to have it
carried forward and set off against his income.

30

35

40

45

157

5

(3) In case of change in shareholding of a company, not being a company in
which public are substantially interested, during any tax year, loss brought
forward from any preceding tax year shall not be allowed to be set off against the
income of the said tax year and subsequent tax years unless the following
conditions are satisfied:––

10

(a) if the beneficial owners of shares of the company carrying at least
51% of voting power, as on the last day of tax year in which loss was
incurred, shall continue to be the beneficial owner of shares carrying at least
51% of voting power, as on the last day of the tax year in which such change
in shareholding takes place; or
(b) even if conditions referred to in clause (a) are not satisfied in case
of a company, being an eligible start-up referred to in section 140,—

15

(i) all shareholders of the company holding shares carrying
voting power, as on the last day of tax year in which loss was incurred,
continue to hold those shares as on the last day of the tax year in which
such change in shareholding takes place; and
(ii) such loss was incurred during the first ten years beginning
from the year of incorporation of the company.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall not apply––

20

25

31 of 2016.

30

(a) where a change in the voting power and shareholding takes place
in the tax year referred to in that sub-section due to death of shareholder or
transfer of shares by way of gift to any relative of the shareholder; or
(b) where change in shareholding of Indian company, being a
subsidiary of foreign company, takes place due to amalgamation or
demerger of the foreign company and 51% of the shareholders of
amalgamating or demerged foreign company are shareholders of
amalgamated or resulting foreign company; or
(c) where change in shareholding takes place in a tax year consequent
to a resolution plan approved under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016 and a reasonable opportunity of being heard was afforded to the
jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner; or
(d) to a company, its subsidiary and subsidiary of such subsidiary, if––

18 of 2013.

35

40
18 of 2013.

45

50

(i) the Board of Directors of such company were suspended by
the Tribunal on an application moved by the Central Government
under section 241 of the Companies Act, 2013 and new directors were
appointed by the Central Government under section 242 of the said
Act; and
(ii) the change in shareholding of such company and its
subsidiary, and subsidiary of such subsidiary has taken place
consequent to a resolution plan approved by the Tribunal under
section 242 of the Companies Act, 2013 and a reasonable opportunity
of being heard was afforded to the jurisdictional Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner; or
(e) to a company to the extent that a change in the shareholding has
taken place during the tax year on account of relocation referred to in
section 70(2); or
(f) to an erstwhile public sector company where ultimate holding
company of such company, immediately after the completion of strategic
disinvestment, continues to hold, directly or through its subsidiary or
subsidiaries, at least 51% of the voting power of such company in aggregate.

158

(5) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (4), if the conditions
specified in sub-section 4(f) is not complied with in any tax year after the
completion of strategic disinvestment, the provisions of sub-section (3) shall
apply for such tax year and subsequent tax years.
(6) In this section,—

5

(a) a company shall be a subsidiary of another company, if such other
company holds more than half in nominal value of the equity share capital
of the company;
(b) the expression “erstwhile public sector company” shall have the
meaning assigned to it in section 116(3)(b);

10

(c) “strategic disinvestment” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 116(3)(c);
(d) “Tribunal” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 2(90) of the Companies Act, 2013.
No set off of
losses against
undisclosed
income
consequent to
search,
requisition and
survey.

120. (1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in any other
provision of this Act, any loss, whether brought forward or otherwise or
unabsorbed depreciation, shall not be allowed to be set off against any undisclosed
income which is included in the total income of any tax year, consequent to a
search conducted under section 247 or a requisition under section 248 or a survey
conducted under section 253, not being a survey under section 253(4).

18 of 2013.
15

20

(2) In this section, the expression “undisclosed income” for any tax year
shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 301.
Submission of
return for losses.

121. Irrespective of anything contained in this Chapter, no loss which has
not been determined in pursuance of a return filed under section 263(1), shall be
carried forward and set off under section 111(1) and 111(2), or 112(1), or 113(2),
or 114(2) or 115(1).

25

CHAPTER VIII
DEDUCTIONS TO BE MADE IN COMPUTING TOTAL INCOME
A.—General
Deductions to
be made in
computing total
income.

121. (1) In computing the total income of an assessee, the deductions
specified in this Chapter shall be allowed from his gross total income, as per and
subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

30

(2) The aggregate amount of the deductions under this Chapter shall not, in
any case, exceed the gross total income of the assessee.
(3) If the deduction under section 133 or 135 or 137 or 138 or 141 or 142
or 143 is admissible in computing the total income of an association of persons or
a body of individuals, no deduction under the same provision shall be made in
relation to the share of income of a member of such association of persons or body
of individuals while computing the total income of such member.

35

(4) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in any of the provisions
of this Chapter under the heading “Deductions in respect of certain incomes”,
where, in the case of an assessee, any amount of profits and gains of an
undertaking or unit or enterprise or eligible business is claimed and allowed as a
deduction under those provisions for any tax year,––

40

(a) deduction in respect of, and to the extent of, such profits and gains
shall not be allowed under any other provision of this Act for such tax year; and

45

(b) shall in no case exceed the profits and gains of such undertaking
or unit or enterprise or eligible business.

